### Accession
PXD012322

### Title
Matrisome properties of scaffolds direct fibroblasts in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis

### Description
In this study we have focused on the biomechanical properties of scaffolds (decellularized lung tissue) derived from healthy individuals and IPF patients. The longitudinal cellular response of scaffold repopulation with healthy fibroblasts has been quantified using SILAC-MS. Increased scaffold density and stiffness along with differential expressions of proteins clearly separated and defined ECM proteins descriptive for IPF respective healthy scaffolds. Our study aim to understand the role of the ECM in the development of IPF. We have used proteomics to define intrinsic scaffold ECM proteins descriptive for healthy respective IPF scaffolds. To evaluate whether these mediators directs or rejects profibrotic responses fibroblasts repopulated on healthy and IPF derived scaffolds were cultured in heavy labeled medie (SILAC) to differentiate between preexisting scaffold proteins and newly synthesized proteins. The spatial distribution of unique ECM proteins characteristic for healthy fibroblasts on IPF scaffolds were verified with histological staining.

### Sample Protocol
The extraction of proteins from decellularized and repopulated lung tissue scaffolds was performed as following: All tissue scaffold slices (decellularized or repopulated with heavy labeled cells) were lyophilized, diluted in extraction buffer and homogenized using a Bioruptor. Samples were reduced and alkylated, followed by overnight trypsin digestion. Decellularized scaffolds samples were desalted with C18 reversed-phase spin columns, whereas repopulated scaffolds were desalted using SOLA™-SPE plates. After desalting were samples resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0,1% formic acid and the peptide concentrations were measured. For all samples we adjusted the volume to inject 1 ug peptides. Peptide separations and data acquisitions were performed on a 25 cm EASY-spray column using an EASY-nLC 1000 LC-system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using a gradient from 5-30% buffer B over 60 min and 30-95 % buffer B for 5 min with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Data were acquired with a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using top-15 data dependent acquisition (DDA) where each full mass scan covered 400-1600 m/z at resolution 70,000 at 200 m/z for both MS and MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) was used for analysis of raw files. Searches were performed towards a reviewed UniProt human database with standard contaminants (downloaded 2015-11-17) in Andromeda. Enzyme specificity were set for trypsin with max 2 missed cleavages at 4.5 ppm for precursors and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Carbamidometylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable. For both proteins and peptides were a false discovery rate of 1% used.

### Publication Abstract
In idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) structural properties of the extracellular matrix (ECM) are altered and influence cellular responses through cell-matrix interactions. Scaffolds (decellularized tissue) derived from subpleural healthy and IPF lungs were examined regarding biomechanical properties and ECM composition of proteins (the matrisome). Scaffolds were repopulated with healthy fibroblasts cultured under static stretch with heavy isotope amino acids (SILAC), to examine newly synthesized proteins over time. IPF scaffolds were characterized by increased tissue density, stiffness, ultimate force, and differential expressions of matrisome proteins compared to healthy scaffolds. Collagens, proteoglycans, and ECM glycoproteins were increased in IPF scaffolds, however while specific basement membrane (BM) proteins such as laminins and collagen IV were decreased, nidogen-2 was also increased. Findings were confirmed with histology, clearly showing a disorganized BM. Fibroblasts produced scaffold-specific proteins mimicking preexisting scaffold composition, where 11 out of 20 BM proteins were differentially expressed, along with increased periostin and proteoglycans production. We demonstrate how matrisome changes affect fibroblast activity using novel approaches to study temporal differences, where IPF scaffolds support a disorganized BM and upregulation of disease-associated proteins. These matrix-directed cellular responses emphasize the IPF matrisome and specifically the BM components as important factors for disease progression.

### Keywords
Silac-ms, Repopulation, Scaffold, Ipf, Lung tissue

### Affiliations
Lund University
Infection Medicine Proteomics BMC D13 Klinikgatan 28 22241 Lund Sweden

### Submitter
Emma Åhrman

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malmström
Infection Medicine Proteomics BMC D13 Klinikgatan 28 22241 Lund Sweden


