### Accession
PXD007086

### Title
An immunoproteomic approach to characterize the CAR interactome and signalosome

### Description
Adoptive transfer of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cells is expected to become the first line of treatment for multiple malignancies, following the enormous success of anti-CD19 therapies. However, their mechanism of action is not fully understood, and clear guidelines for the design of safe and efficient receptors are missing. We hereby describe a systematic analysis of the CAR “signalosome” in human primary T cells. Two CAR designs were compared: a second-generation (PSCA2) and a third-generation (PSCA3) anti-PSCA CAR. Phosphorylation events triggered by CAR-mediated recognition of target cells were quantified by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, 40 million cells were lysed in denaturing lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 8, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate. The proteins were reduced with 4.5 mM DTT and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. After dilution to reduce urea concentration, trypsin digestion was carried out at 37 degrees Celsius overnight. To quench the digesiton, tryptic peptides were then acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with C18 Sep-Pak cartridges according to the manufacturer’s procedure (Waters). Following lyophilization, the dried peptide pellet was re-dissolved in IAP buffer containing 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM sodium chloride. Phosphotyrosine-containing peptides were immunoprecipitated with immobilized anti-phosphotyrosine antibody p-Tyr-1000. (Cell Signaling Technology).  After overnight incubation, the antibody beads were washed 3 times with IAP buffer, followed by 2 washes with distilled, deionized H2O. The phosphotyrosine peptides were eluted twice with 0.15% TFA, and the volume was reduced to 20 µl via vacuum centrifugation.  The remaining peptides from pY enrichment were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges and re-dissolved in IMAC binding buffer containing 1% aqueous acetic acid and 30% acetonitrile. The phosphopeptides in each fraction were enriched using IMAC resin (Sigma PHOS-Select™ Iron Affinity Gel). Briefly, the IMAC resin was washed twice with binding buffer. The peptides were incubated with the IMAC resin for 30 min at room temperature, with gentle agitation every 5 minutes. Ten microliters IMAC resin was added per milligram of starting material. After incubation, the IMAC resin was washed twice with wash buffer 1 (0.1% acetic acid and 100 mM NaCl, pH 3.0), followed by 2 washes with wash buffer 2 (30% ACN, 0.1% acetic acid, pH 3.0) and 1 wash with ddH2O. The phosphopeptides were eluted with elution buffer (20% ACN, 200 mM Ammonium Hydroxide). The volume was reduced to 20 µl via vacuum centrifugation. A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced with an electrospray bench top orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive Plus, Thermo, San Jose, CA) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments.  The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (C18 Pepmap, 2 cm x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5µm, 100Å) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid.  The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18 Pepmap, 75 µm ID x 25 cm, 2 µm, 100Å, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  The 90-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 60 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibrate for 10 minutes.  The flow rate on analytical column was 300 nl/min. Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan. MS/MS scans were performed using 60 second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
Sequest and Mascot searches were performed against the Uni-Prot human database downloaded 07/2015. Two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed; the precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm.  MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.05 Da.  Dynamic modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys), oxidation (Met), phosphorylation (STY) and SILAC labeling (K/R). Both MASCOT and SEQUEST search results were summarized in Scaffold 4.4 (proteomesoftware.com).  MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5) and Skyline (MacCoss Lab Software, University of Washington)were used to quantify the relative peptide intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Adoptive transfer of T cells that express a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) is an approved immunotherapy that may be curative for some hematological cancers. To better understand the therapeutic mechanism of action, we systematically analyzed CAR signaling in human primary T cells by mass spectrometry. When we compared the interactomes and the signaling pathways activated by distinct CAR-T cells that shared the same antigen-binding domain but differed in their intracellular domains and their in vivo antitumor efficacy, we found that only second-generation CARs induced the expression of a constitutively phosphorylated form of CD3&#x3b6; that resembled the endogenous species. This phenomenon was independent of the choice of costimulatory domains, or the hinge/transmembrane region. Rather, it was dependent on the size of the intracellular domains. Moreover, the second-generation design was also associated with stronger phosphorylation of downstream secondary messengers, as evidenced by global phosphoproteome analysis. These results suggest that second-generation CARs can activate additional sources of CD3&#x3b6; signaling, and this may contribute to more intense signaling and superior antitumor efficacy that they display compared to third-generation CARs. Moreover, our results provide a deeper understanding of how CARs interact physically and/or functionally with endogenous T cell molecules, which will inform the development of novel optimized immune receptors.

### Keywords
Chimeric antigen receptors, Phosphoproteomics, Tonic signaling

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Abate-Daga
Moffitt Cancer Center


