### Accession
PXD009362

### Title
Proteome and transcriptome profiling of equine myofibrillar myopathy identifies diminished peroxiredoxin 6 and enhanced cysteine metabolic pathways

### Description
Equine myofibrillar myopathy (MFM) causes exertional muscle pain and is characterized by myofibrillar disarray and ectopic protein aggregates of unknown origin. To investigate the pathophysiology of MFM, we compared the skeletal muscle proteome and 3 h post-exercise transcriptome of gluteal muscle in MFM and control Arabian horses using iTRAQ and RNA-sequencing analyses. Differential expression (DE) was evaluated using edgeR and pathway analysis using Cytoscape and Cluego. Proteome analysis revealed significantly lower antioxidant peroxiredoxin 6 content (PRDX6, ↓4.14 log2 fold change [FC]), sarcomere protein tropomyosin (TPM2, ↓3.24x) and higher fatty acid transport enzyme carnitine palmitoyl transferase (CPT1B, ↑3.49x) in MFM vs. control muscle at rest. Three hours after exercise, 191 genes were DE in MFM vs. control muscle with a remarkably focused > 1.5 log2FC in genes involved in sulfur compound/ cysteine metabolism such as cystathionine-beta-synthase [CBS, ↑4.51] and a cysteine and neutral amino acid membrane transporter [SLC7A10, ↑1.79]. In MFM vs. control at rest, 284 genes were DE with > 1.5 log2 FC in pathways for structure morphogenesis, fiber organization, tissue development and cell differentiation including> 2 log2 FC in alpha actin-cardiac [↑ ACTC1], cytoskeletal desmoplakin [↑ DSP], basement membrane usherin [↓ USH2A] and delta like non-canonical Notch ligand 1, [↓ DLK1]. In conclusion, myofibrillar disarray and protein aggregation in MFM horses was embodied by DE expression in pathways of structure/fiber organization and tissue regeneration. Reduced antioxidant capacity as a potential etiology for MFM was supported by diminished cysteine rich antioxidant peroxiredoxin 6 with compensatory increased cysteine synthesis following exercise.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation, Peptide Fractionation and Mass Spectrometry: Twenty mg samples of frozen ground tissue from gluteal muscle obtained at rest from 3 MFM and 3 control horses was reconstituted with a ratio of 10 L extraction buffer [7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.4 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5, 20% acetonitrile and 4 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP)] per milligram of tissue, while on ice. The samples were vortexed briefly, then sonicated at 30% amplitude for 7 sec in a Branson Digital Sonifier 250 (Branson Ultrasonics Corporation, Danbury, CT). For each sample, 150 L was transferred to a PCT tube with a 150 L cap for the Barocycler NEP2320 (Pressure Biosciences Inc., South Easton, MA) and cycled between 35 kpsi for 30 sec and 0 kpsi for 15 sec for 40 cycles at 37 °C. The PCT tube was uncapped and 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) was added to a final concentration of 8 mM MMTS, recapped, inverted several times and incubated 15 min. at room temperature. The samples were transferred to a new 1.5 mL microfuge Eppendorf Protein LoBind tube. Two aliquots for each sample were taken for protein concentration determination by Bradford assay.      For in-solution proteolytic digestion and iTRAQ labeling, a 100 ug aliquot of each sample was transferred to a new 1.5 mL microfuge tube and brought to the same volume with protein extraction buffer and 8 mM MMTS.  All samples were diluted four-fold with ultra-pure water and trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), added in a 1:35 ratio of trypsin to total protein.  Samples were incubated overnight for 16 hrs. at 37 °C after which they were frozen at -80 °C for 0.5 hrs and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  Each sample was then cleaned with a 4 mL Extract Clean™ C18 SPE cartridge from Grace-Davidson (Deerfield, IL), eluates were vacuum dried and suspended in dissolution buffer (0.5M triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) to a final 2 g/L concentration. 40 g for each sample was labeled with iTRAQ® 8-plex reagent (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA) per manufacturer’s protocol.  After labeling, the 40 g aliquot of each sample was multiplexed together into one 1.5 mL tube and vacuum-dried.  The multiplexed sample was cleaned with a 3 CC Oasis MCX SPE cartridge (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA), and the eluate was dried in vacuo.  The iTRAQ® labeled samples were resuspended in Buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate pH 10 in 98:2 water:acetonitrile) and fractionated offline by high pH C18 reversed-phase (RP) chromatography. A MAGIC 2002 HPLC (Michrom BioResources Inc., Auburn, CA) was used with a C18 Gemini-NX column, 150 mm x 2 mm internal diameter, 5 M particle, 110 Å pore size (Phenomenex, Torrence, CA).  Buffer A was 10 mM ammonium formate, pH10 in 98:2 water:acetonitrile  and Buffer B was 10 mM ammonium formate, pH10 in 10:90 water:acetonitrile. The flow rate was 200 L/min with a gradient from 5-35% Buffer B over 60 min, followed by 35-60% over 5 min. Fractions were collected every 2 minutes and UV absorbances were monitored at 215 nm and 280 nm. Peptide containing fractions were divided into two equal numbered groups, “early” and “late”. The first “early” fraction was concatenated with the first “late” fraction, and so on. Concatenated samples were dried in vacuo, resuspended in loading solvent (98:2:0.01, water:acetonitrile:formic acid) and 1-1.5 µg aliquots were run on a Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) as described previously with the following modifications: lock mass was not used, HCD activation time was 20 msec, dynamic exclusion duration was 15sec and the minimum signal threshold for data dependent trigger was 20000 counts. The mass spectrometer RAW data were converted to mzXML using MS Convert software from the ProteoWizard Toolkit (PMID: 23051804) and to MGF files using TINT raw-to-mgf converter (in-house tool).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics identification and statistical analysis: MGF formatted files were used for identification of peaks using several search engines to limit potential pitfalls of using a single algorithm/method and to perform more exhaustive survey of the spectra. Multiple search engines {Shteynberg et al., 2013, #29400} such as OMSSA (version 2.1.9), X!Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2), Andromeda (version 1.5.3.4), MS Amanda (version 1.0.0.7501), MS-GF+ (version Beta v10282), Comet (version 2016.01 rev. 2), MyriMatch (version 2.2.140) and Tide were invoked within the SearchGUI (version 3.2.12) framework and results collated using PeptideShaker (version 1.16.4). Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the Equus caballus (28232, >99.9%), Equus caballus ferus (1, < 0.1%), Sus scrofa (1, < 0.1%) complement of the UniProtKB (version October, 2016), with 28,234 (target sequences). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: a) Trypsin, specific cleavage, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.05 Da as MS2 tolerances b) fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da) c) iTRAQ specific modifications 8-plex of peptide N-term (+304.199039 Da), and iTRAQ 8-plex of K (+304.199039 Da) and d) variable modifications: Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da), iTRAQ 8-plex of Y (+304.199039 Da).   Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker (version 1.16.4). Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy-hit distribution. The resulting file was imported into Reporter package (version 0.7.2) (http://compomics.github.io/projects/reporter.html), included as complementary tool within the SearchGUI platform, and normalized as ratios using control horses. The resulting data table was exported as a text file, log transformed and analyzed to determine significance between treatments using Perseus. P values were adjusted for multiple testing by using the permutation-based FDR method included within Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Equine myofibrillar myopathy (MFM) causes exertional muscle pain and is characterized by myofibrillar disarray and ectopic desmin aggregates of unknown origin. To investigate the pathophysiology of MFM, we compared resting and 3 h postexercise transcriptomes of gluteal muscle and the resting skeletal muscle proteome of MFM and control Arabian horses with RNA sequencing and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation analyses. Three hours after exercise, 191 genes were identified as differentially expressed (DE) in MFM vs. control muscle with &gt;1 log<sub>2</sub> fold change (FC) in genes involved in sulfur compound/cysteine metabolism such as cystathionine-beta-synthase ( CBS, &#x2193;4.51), a cysteine and neutral amino acid membrane transporter ( SLC7A10, &#x2193;1.80 MFM), and a cationic transporter (SLC24A1, &#x2193;1.11 MFM). In MFM vs. control at rest, 284 genes were DE with &gt;1 log<sub>2</sub> FC in pathways for structure morphogenesis, fiber organization, tissue development, and cell differentiation including &gt; 1 log<sub>2</sub> FC in cardiac alpha actin ( ACTC1 &#x2191;2.5 MFM), cytoskeletal desmoplakin ( DSP &#x2191;2.4 MFM), and basement membrane usherin ( USH2A &#x2193;2.9 MFM). Proteome analysis revealed significantly lower antioxidant peroxiredoxin 6 content (PRDX6, &#x2193;4.14 log<sub>2</sub> FC MFM), higher fatty acid transport enzyme carnitine palmitoyl transferase (CPT1B, &#x2191;3.49 MFM), and lower sarcomere protein tropomyosin (TPM2, &#x2193;3.24 MFM) in MFM vs. control muscle at rest. We propose that in MFM horses, altered cysteine metabolism and a deficiency of cysteine-containing antioxidants combined with a high capacity to oxidize fatty acids and generate ROS during aerobic exercise causes chronic oxidation and aggregation of key proteins such as desmin.

### Keywords
Horse, Proteome, Antioxidant, Myopathy

### Affiliations
Michigan State University
McPhail Equine Performance Center, Department of Large Animal Clinical Sciences, Michigan State University

### Submitter
Sudeep Perumbakkam

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie J Valberg
McPhail Equine Performance Center, Department of Large Animal Clinical Sciences, Michigan State University


