### Accession
PXD003664

### Title
Serial interactome capture of the human cell nucleus

### Description
Novel RNA-guided cellular functions are paralleled by an increasing number of RNA binding proteins (RBPs). We present “serial interactome capture” (serIC), a multiple purification procedure of UV-crosslinked poly(A)-RNA-protein complexes that enables global RBP detection with maximal specificity. We apply serIC to nuclei of proliferating K562 cells to obtain the first human nuclear interactome. The domain composition of the 382 identified nuclear RBPs markedly differs from previous IC experiments, including fewer factors without known RNA binding domains that are in better agreement with computationally predicted RNA binding. serIC extends the number of DNA-RNA binding proteins (DRBPs), and reveals  a network of RBPs involved in p53 signaling and double strand break repair. serIC is an effective tool to couple global RBP capture with additional selection or labelling steps for specific detection of highly purified RBPs. The nuclear interactome presented here is a stepping-stone towards deciphering of the functional RNA-protein network in the mammalian nucleus.

### Sample Protocol
UV crosslinking, cells lysis, nuclei isolation, high LiDS lysis, poly(A)RNA-RBP-capture with oligo(dT)beads, DNAse digest, recapture, LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by MaxQuant according to the details in the paper.

### Publication Abstract
Novel RNA-guided cellular functions are paralleled by an increasing number of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). Here we present 'serial RNA interactome capture' (serIC), a multiple purification procedure of ultraviolet-crosslinked poly(A)-RNA-protein complexes that enables global RBP detection with high specificity. We apply serIC to the nuclei of proliferating K562 cells to obtain the first human nuclear RNA interactome. The domain composition of the 382 identified nuclear RBPs markedly differs from previous IC experiments, including few factors without known RNA-binding domains that are in good agreement with computationally predicted RNA binding. serIC extends the number of DNA-RNA-binding proteins (DRBPs), and reveals a network of RBPs involved in p53 signalling and double-strand break repair. serIC is an effective tool to couple global RBP capture with additional selection or labelling steps for specific detection of highly purified RBPs.

### Keywords
Rna binding proteins; interactome capture; nuclear rna binding proteome

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Otto Warburg Laboratories, 14195 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ulf Örom
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Otto Warburg Laboratories, 14195 Berlin, Germany


