### Accession
PXD031607

### Title
Triazolinedione protein modification: from an overlooked off-target effect to a tryptophan-based bioconjugation strategy

### Description
Labelling of tyrosine residues in peptides and proteins has been reported to selectively occur via a 'tyrosine-click' reaction with triazolinedione reagents (TAD). However, we here demonstrate that TAD reagents are actually not selective for tyrosine and that tryptophan residues are in fact also labelled with these reagents. This off-target labelling remained under the radar as it is challenging to detect these physiologically stable but thermally labile modifications with the commonly used HCD and CID MS/MS techniques. We show that selectivity of tryptophan over tyrosine can be achieved by lowering the pH of the aqueous buffer to effect selective Trp-labelling. Given the low relative abundance of tryptophan compared to tyrosine in natural proteins, this results in a new site-selective bioconjugation method that does not rely on enzymes nor unnatural amino acids and is demonstrated for peptides and recombinant proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The proteome-wide selectivity of TAD towards tyrosine and tryptophan was examined using PTAD alkyne 2c and a tryptic digest of a HeLa cellular proteome which was purchased from Pierce™. PTAD alkyne 2c was prepared as described in section 1.2 using 1.3 mg TCCA and 4.8 mg PTAD-alkyne (urazole precursor), mixed in 500 µL MeCN and left shaking for 2 h at room temperature in the dark. 20 µg HeLa digest was dissolved in either 60 µL PBS pH 4 or PBS pH 7.2. For both pH settings, the sample was split in 3 x 20 µL. Following the oxidation reaction, the PTAD alkyne solution was diluted to a 2 mM solution in MeCN and 2 µL of this PTAD-alkyne solution was added to each of the 20 µL digest solutions (6 in total) and mixed by pipetting up and down. Before MS analysis on the Fusion Lumos system (procedure described in section 1.1), 2 µL of 10% TFA in water was added to acidify the samples for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
In the search parameters, the PTAD alkyne modification was included as a variable modification that can occur both on tyrosine and tryptophan. For PTAD alkyne modification on tryptophan, we included the possibility of a neutral loss of the PTAD alkyne moiety upon HCD MS/MS analysis in the search, which ensures that the tryptophan-TAD modifications, which are present on the precursor peptide but fall off during HCD fragmentation, are detectable. Identifications at 99% confidence level were stored in ms-lims for data management.

### Publication Abstract
Labelling of tyrosine residues in peptides and proteins has been reported to selectively occur <i>via</i> a 'tyrosine-click' reaction with triazolinedione reagents (TAD). However, we here demonstrate that TAD reagents are actually not selective for tyrosine and that tryptophan residues are in fact also labelled with these reagents. This off-target labelling remained under the radar as it is challenging to detect these physiologically stable but thermally labile modifications with the commonly used HCD and CID MS/MS techniques. We show that selectivity of tryptophan over tyrosine can be achieved by lowering the pH of the aqueous buffer to effect selective Trp-labelling. Given the low relative abundance of tryptophan compared to tyrosine in natural proteins, this results in a new site-selective bioconjugation method that does not rely on enzymes nor unnatural amino acids and is demonstrated for peptides and recombinant proteins.

### Keywords
Site-selective protein modification, Tad, Tryptophan, Protein modification

### Affiliations
Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium 
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 75, 9052 Ghent, Belgium

Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium  VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 75, 9052 Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Klaas Decoene

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium  VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 75, 9052 Ghent, Belgium


