### Accession
PXD005884

### Title
CDPK4 is a pleiotropic regulator controlling the atypical Plasmodium cell cycle during mosquito transmission

### Description
Transmission of malaria parasites from humans to the mosquito vector exclusively relies on the sexual reproduction of the parasite within the mosquito blood meal. Upon ingestion, Plasmodium male gametocyte undergoes explosive development: within 10 minutes, it completes three rounds of genome replication and endomitosis, assembles eight axonemes, and emerges from the host red blood cell. The plant-like calcium-dependent protein kinase 4 (CDPK4) was previously shown to be essential for male gametogenesis placing this kinase as an attractive drug target to block malaria transmission. Here we have identified and resolved three distinct molecular functions of CDPK4 during male gametogenesis. Activity of a myristoylated isoform is first required up to 20 seconds after activation to load the Mini-Chromosome Maintenance complex onto origins of replication. This role is partially mediated by a conserved protein belonging to the SAPS-domain family which is involved in the G1 to S-phase transition in eukaryotes. At the same time, activity of myristoylated CDPK4 is required to phosphorylate a Plasmodium-specific microtubule-associated protein necessary for mitotic spindle assembly. Finally, activity of a short non-myristoylated isoform of CDPK4 is essential seconds prior to completion of cytokinesis and the activation of male gamete motility. This late role has been linked to another Plasmodium-specific protein that is incorporated into axonemes during gametogenesis. This study reveals how a kinase of a protist parasite integrates and transduces multiple signals with a high spatiotemporal resolution to control both evolutionarily conserved and Plasmodium-specific biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
1)      CDPK4 HA-affinity purification: ·          Reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide; in-gel digestion with trypsin; ·          LC-MS/MS on Orbitrap Velos: ·     Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano: 100um id x 20mm trap / 75um id x 250mm column, 4 – 32% ACN/0.1% FA linear gradient in 60 min /95 min cycle time  2)      Thiophosphopeptides capture: ·          Reduced with TCEP, Lys-C /Trypsin digest ·          LC-MS/MS on Orbitrap Velos ·          Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano: 100um id x 20mm trap / 75um id x 250mm column, 4 – 36% ACN/0.1% FA linear gradient in 90 min /130 min cycle time  3)      Phosphoproteome for CDPK4KO ·          Reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide; trypsin digest; ·          LC-MS/MS on Orbitrap Fusion: ·          Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano: 100um id x 20mm trap / 75um id x 500mm column, 4 – 32% ACN/0.1% FA linear gradient in 120 min /150 min cycle time

### Data Protocol
In CDPK4-3xHA interaction experiments Raw data was processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and searched with Mascot (Matrix Science) against a combined mouse and P. berghei ANKA database (P.bergheiANKA.proteome, v2 May 2015) with the following parameters: trypsin/P as enzyme, maximum of 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm parent ion mass tolerance, 0.5 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, and variable modifications of oxidized M, carbamidomethyl C, deamidated NQ, Gln to pyroGlu (N-terminal Q), N-terminal acetylation and N-terminal formylation. Database search results were refined using Mascot Percolator (significance threshold < 0.05, FDR < 1%). High confidence peptides were apportioned to proteins using Mascot Protein Family summary. Protein identification required at least three high-confidence peptide (FDR < 1%).  thiophosphorylated peptides.  Raw data was processed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with both SequestHT and Mascot search engines. The dynamic modifications set in Mascot were Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidated (NQ), Iodo(Y), Phospho (STY) and Oxidation (M) with fragment mass tolerance set at 0.8 Da, while in SequestHT the selected dynamic modifications were Deamidated (NQ), Iodo(Y), Phospho (STY) with fragment ions mass tolerance set at 0.5 Da.  Precursor mass tolerance was set at 20ppm for both.  The peptide list was filtered with Percolator where the q-value was set at 0.01, and the search results were merged.  In MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) with most of the parameters settings at default value. The following parameters are specific for this experiment: trypsin with maximum 2 missed cleavages sites; Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ) and Phospho (STY) were set as variable modification; no fixed modification on Carbamidomethyl (C).  Phosphoproteome profiling.  Raw data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 with both SequestHT and Mascot search engines against a combined protein database of Plasmodium berghei (http://plasmodb.org/) and mouse (UniprotKB). The dynamic modifications set in both Mascot were Acetyl (N-term), Deamidated (NQ), Phospho (STY) and Oxidation (M), while in SequestHT Camabidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. Settings were the same in both: Precursor mass tolerance at 20 ppm, fragment at 0.5 Da, and TMT6plex as fixed modification.  The search results were merged and the peptide list was filtered with Percolator where the q-value was set at 0.01, and the phosphorylation sites were localised by phosphoRS implemented in the PD2.1 with site probability at 0.75 as cut-off.  Both unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantification, and the reporter abundances were based on S/N, then the  abundances was normalised on Total Peptide Amount, and the scaled with On Channels Average (per file).  The co-isolation threshold was set at 50% to reduce the isolation interference.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Malaria, Lc-msms, Phospho, Thiophospho, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


