### Accession
PXD014437

### Title
iTRAQ-Based Quantitative Proteomic Comparison of 2D and 3D Adipocyte Cell Models Co-cultured with Macrophages Using Online 2D-nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS

### Description
The demand for novel three-dimensional (3D) cell culture models of adipose tissue has been increasing, and proteomic investigations are important for determining the underlying causes of obesity, type II diabetes, and metabolic disorders. In this study, we performed global quantitative proteomic profiling of three 3D-cultured 3T3-L1 cells (preadipocytes, adipocytes and co-cultured adipocytes with macrophages) and their 2D-cultured counterparts using 2D-nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS with iTRAQ labelling. A total of 2,885 shared proteins from six types of adipose cells were identified and quantified in four replicates. Using iTRAQ-based quantitative assessments, we found that the primary proteins involved in carbohydrate and fatty acid metabolism, adipogenesis and the electron transport chain were highly expressed in 3D cell culture system when compared to those of 2D-cultured cells. Furthermore, it was also shown that the expression levels of proteins associated with metabolic pathways, carbon metabolism and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis were up-regulated, whereas proteins implicated in both DNA replication and the cell cycle were expressed at lower levels compared to those of the 2D mono-cultured cells. Based on these results, the 3D adipocyte model can help elucidate the mechanisms underpinning metabolic syndromes and aid the development of new medical treatments for metabolic disorders.

### Sample Protocol
One-hundred micrograms of extracted proteins from the 2D- and 3D-cultured 3T3-L1 cells (six types) were transferred into a new tube. The six tubes were reduced utilizing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) solution with 10 mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) for 2 h at 37°C and alkylated by adding iodoacetamide (IAA) to a final concentration of 20 mM for 30 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. To remove the remaining IAA in solution, L-cysteine was added at a final concentration of 40 mM for 30 min at RT. Protein samples were proteolytically digested with trypsin at a ratio of 1:20 (enzyme:protein) at 37°C for 18 h. Each peptide solution was purified using HLB cartridges (1 cc, 10 mg) and then dried using a concentrator (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus) under a vacuum. Each of the dried samples were reconstituted with 30 L of 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 50 L of isopropanol-suspended iTRAQ reagent containing the reporter ion from 114 to 119 (8-plex iTRAQ reagents). Six samples were labelled with the respective tags as follows: 2D mono-cultured preadipocytes (2P)-114 reagent, 2D mono-cultured adipocytes (2A)-115 reagent, 2D co-cultured adipocytes with macrophage (2C)-116 reagent, 3D mono-cultured preadipocytes (3P)-117 reagent, 3D mono-cultured adipocytes (3A)-118 reagent and 3D co-cultured adipocytes with macrophage (3C)-119 reagent. All samples were incubated for 2 h at RT before adding an equal amount of each sample into a new tube and drying using a concentrator under a vacuum. The iTRAQ-labelled samples reconstituted with 1 mL of water were purified using an HLB cartridge (1 cc, 30 mg) and dried using a concentrator under a vacuum. The iTRAQ-labelled peptides were reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid (FA) solution and analysed using 2D-nLC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ-labelled peptides were identified and quantified by comparing MS/MS spectra against the Mus musculus database (mouse, UP000000589, updated on 01/18/2019) from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/) with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). To perform a data dependence analysis, the MS parameters were set to 20 ppm of a precursor peptide ion mass tolerance and 0.02 Da of a fragment peptide ion mass tolerance. Two missed cleavages were allowed. iTRAQ-8plex labelling of the N-terminus and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as the fixed modifications. The iTRAQ-8plex labelling of lysine residues, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were all set as variable modifications. The quantified proteins obtained from six different 3T3-L1 cells were normalized against 20 median proteins using an experimental bias of the quantification method and were identified with at least two peptides per protein in Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14. Data processing and statistical analysis were carried out using Perseus 1.5.8.5. The iTRAQ ratios of proteins were transformed by log2(x) and filtered by a minimum of three valid values. The missing values in ratios of reporter ions corresponding to each 3T3-L1 cell cultured in the 2D/3D system were imputed using a normal distribution. Subsequently, a one-sample t-test was carried out to obtain the statistical significance among biological and technical replicates. The significance threshold used was a ±1.5-fold change and p < 0.05. The resulting data were exported to Microsoft Excel, and a Venn diagram was generated using the online tool Venny 2.1 (http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/index.html). Protein classification was performed using the PANTHER classification system (http://www.pantherdb.org/tools/) based on functional annotations for cellular component, biological process, protein class and molecular function. The search tool for protein-protein interactions and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis were used to identify interacting genes and proteins (STRING, https://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
The demand for novel three-dimensional (3D) cell culture models of adipose tissue has been increasing, and proteomic investigations are important for determining the underlying causes of obesity, type II diabetes, and metabolic disorders. In this study, we performed global quantitative proteomic profiling of three 3D-cultured 3T3-L1 cells (preadipocytes, adipocytes and co-cultured adipocytes with macrophages) and their 2D-cultured counterparts using 2D-nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS with iTRAQ labelling. A total of 2,885 shared proteins from six types of adipose cells were identified and quantified in four replicates. Among them, 48 proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism (e.g., PDH&#x3b1;, MDH1/2, FH) and the mitochondrial fatty acid beta oxidation pathway (e.g., VLCAD, ACADM, ECHDC1, ALDH6A1) were relatively up-regulated in the 3D co-culture model compared to those in 2D and 3D mono-cultured cells. Conversely, 12 proteins implicated in cellular component organisation (e.g., ANXA1, ANXA2) and the cell cycle (e.g., MCM family proteins) were down-regulated. These quantitative assessments showed that the 3D co-culture system of adipocytes and macrophages led to the development of insulin resistance, thereby providing a promising in vitro obesity model that is more equivalent to the in vivo conditions with respect to the mechanisms underpinning metabolic syndromes and the effect of new medical treatments for metabolic disorders.

### Keywords
3d-culture, Proteomic quantification, Adipocytes, Macrophages, Itraq

### Affiliations
Kyung Hee University
Center for Bioanalysis, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science

### Submitter
Sun Young Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Dukjin Kang
Center for Bioanalysis, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science


