### Accession
PXD031915

### Title
A wide-proteome analysis to identify molecular pathways in-volved in kidney response to high fat diet in mice

### Description
The etiopathogenesis of obesity-related chronic kidney disease (CKD) is still scarcely understood. Aim of this study is to shed light on the molecular pathogenesis of obesity-induced CKD by assessing the effect of high fat diet (HF) on molecular pathways leading to organ damage, steatosis, and fibrosis. Six-week-old male C57BL/6N mice were fed HF diet or normal chow for 20-weeks. Kidneys were collected for genomic, proteomic, histological studies and lipid quantification. The main findings were as follows: 1) HF diet activated specific pathways leading to fibrosis and increased fatty acid metabolism; 2) HF diet promoted a metabolic shift of lipid metabolism from peroxisomes to mitochondria; 3) no signs of lipid accumulation and/or fibrosis were observed, histologically; 4) the early signs of kidney damage seemed to be related to changes in membrane protein expression and/or oxidative stress; 5) the proto-oncogene MYC was the top upstream transcriptional regulator of changes occurring in protein expression. These results demonstrated the potential usefulness of specific selected molecules as early marker of injury in HF, while histomorphological changes become visible late in CDK progression. The integration of these data with data from biological fluids could help the identification of biomarkers useful for the clinical practice.

### Sample Protocol
Fourteen six-week-old male C57BL/6N mice were divided into two groups and fed for 20 weeks as follows: 1) normal chow diet (10% fat, CTR) and 2) high fat (HF) diet (60% fat) (Charles River Laboratories). The mice were housed at constant room temperature (22 ± 2°C) and humidity (60 ± 5%) with a light-dark cycle of 12 hours each with water ad libitum. At the age of 26 weeks, the mice were sacrificed through exposure to atmosphere saturation of carbon dioxide for 15 min. Kidneys were collected, immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80° until analyses or fixed in 10% buffered formalin, routinely processed and paraffin-embedded. The Italian Ministry of Health approved all animal procedures (Number 5AD83.N.G1Q). Kidney tissues of 8 CTR mice and 8 mice fed HF diet were analyzed by a shotgun label free proteomic approach for the identification and quantification of expressed proteins. The tissues were homogenized in 100 μL of extraction buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM Hepes pH 8.0, with Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitors cocktail). Prior to proteolysis, proteins were reduced with 13 mM dithioerythriol (30 min at 55 °C) and alkylated with 26 mM iodoacetamide (30 min at room temperature). Protein digestion was performed using sequence-grade trypsin (Promega) for 16 h/37 °C using a protein:enzyme ratio of 20:1. The collected peptides were desalted using Zip-Tip C18 before Mass Spectrometric (MS) analysis. NanoHPLC coupled to MS/MS analysis was performed on Dionex UltiMate 3000 directly connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptide mixtures were enriched on 75 μm ID × 150 mm EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated using the LC gradient: 1% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 10 min, 1–4% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 6 min, 4–30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 147 min and 30–50% ACN in 0.1% formic for 3 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Orbitrap-MS spectra of eluting peptides were collected over an m/z range of 375–1500 at resolution of 120,000, operating in a data-dependent mode with a cycle time of 3 s between master scans. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at resolution of 15,000 using a normalized collision energy of 35%, and an isolation window of 1.6 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. Rejection of +1, and unassigned charge states were enabled. A database search was conducted against the Mus Musculus Uniprot sequence database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes, release 4/03/ 2019) with MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) software. The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to Arg and Lys excluding Pro, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation, Met oxidation, Asn/Gln deamidation and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built-in labelfree quantification algorithms (LFQ) based on extracted ion intensity of precursor ions. False protein identifications (1%) were estimated by searching MS/MS spectra against the corresponding reversed-sequence (decoy) database.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis was performed using the Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0). Only proteins that were present and quantified in at least 75% of the repeats were positively identified in a sample and used for statistical analysis. Proteins were considered differentially expressed if they were present only in one condition or showed significant t-test difference (p ≤ 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The etiopathogenesis of obesity-related chronic kidney disease (CKD) is still scarcely understood. To this aim, we assessed the effect of high-fat diet (HF) on molecular pathways leading to organ damage, steatosis, and fibrosis. Six-week-old male C57BL/6N mice were fed HF diet or normal chow for 20 weeks. Kidneys were collected for genomic, proteomic, histological studies, and lipid quantification. The main findings were as follows: (1) HF diet activated specific pathways leading to fibrosis and increased fatty acid metabolism; (2) HF diet promoted a metabolic shift of lipid metabolism from peroxisomes to mitochondria; (3) no signs of lipid accumulation and/or fibrosis were observed, histologically; (4) the early signs of kidney damage seemed to be related to changes in membrane protein expression; (5) the proto-oncogene MYC was one of the upstream transcriptional regulators of changes occurring in protein expression. These results demonstrated the potential usefulness of specific selected molecules as early markers of renal injury in HF, while histomorphological changes become visible later in obesity-related CDK. The integration of these information with data from biological fluids could help the identification of biomarkers useful for the early detection and prevention of tissue damage in clinical practice.

### Keywords
Proteomics; nanolc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
università degli studi di Milano 
DIVAS department of veterinary medicine and animal science

### Submitter
francesca grassi scalvini

### Lab Head
Dr Francesca Grassi Scalvini
DIVAS department of veterinary medicine and animal science


