### Accession
PXD001271

### Title
HT-29 treated with mature fragilysin LC-MSMS

### Description
Fragilysin is a protein secreted by toxigenic Bacteroides fragilis strains. Fragilysin has  a motive HEXXHXXGXXH, which is a zinc-binding motif found in metalloproteinases clan   termed metzincins. In this study we obtained all three known recombinant fragilysin isoforms   in Escherichia coli and tested its activity. We detected no cleavage of gelatin and chromogenic   substrates (such as azocoll and azocasein) by all isoforms. We demonstrated that treatment of   HT-29 cells with fragilysins caused E-cadherin cleavage, nevertheless cleavage of recombinant   E-cadherins was not observe as well as E-cadherin in isolated cell fractions. It was shown that   the native structure of active site characteristic for metalloproteinases is necessary for fragilysin   biologic activity. We detected proteins that are released in cultural medium after HT-29 cells   treatment with fragilysin. These proteins are potential substrates for fragilysin.

### Sample Protocol
Gel-free digestion of the protein sample with surfactant RapiGest SF or with DTT: The pellet was resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 0,5% surfactant   RapiGest SF (Waters) or in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 10 mM DTT (BioRad, USA)   and 1 μl Protease inhibitor Mix (GE Healthcare, USA), mixed in a vortex, and heated at 100 °C   for 5 min. After cooling to room temperature insoluble material was removed by centrifugation   at 15000 g for 5 min. Supernatant was separated and protein concentration was determined   by Bradford (Bradford Protein Assay Kit, BioRad, USA). When RapiGest SF was used, in   supernatant protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT (BioRad, USA) in 100   mM ammonium bicarbonate at 60°C for 30 min. In supernatant reduced protein disulfide bonds   were alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (BioRad, USA) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate   at room temperature and in dark for 30 min and 10 mM DTT (BioRad, USA) in 100 mM   ammonium bicarbonate was added iteratively . Upon alkylated trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass   Spectrometry Grade, Promega, USA) was added to supernatant in ratio trypsin : protein equal 1 :   50 and incubated at 37°C overnight. For inactivation of trypsin activity and degradation of the   acid-labile surfactant (when RapiGest SF was used) stock solution of trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma,   USA) (final concentration in sample 0,5%) was added to digest. The samples dissolved in   RapiGest SF incubated at 37°C for 45 min and centrifugated at 15000 g for 10 min for removing   of surfactant. Then LC-MS analysis of the resulting samples was performed. LC-MS analysis: Analysis was performed on TripleTOF 5600+ mass-spectrometer with NanoSpray   III ion source (ABSciex, Canada) coupled with a NanoLC Ultra 2D+ nano-HPLC system   (Eksigent, Dublin, CA). The HPLC system was configured in a trap-elute mode. For sample   loading buffer and buffer A the mix of 98.9% water, 1% methanol, 0.1% formic acid(v/v) was   used. Buffer B was 99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Samples were loaded on a trap   column Chrom XP C18 3 μm 120Å 350μm*0.5 mm at a flow rate of 3 μl/min for 10 min and   eluted through the separation column 3C18-CL-120 (3 μm 120 Å) 75 μm*150 mm (Eksigent,   Dublin, CA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient was either from 5 to 40% of buffer B in   120 min or from 5% (0 min) to 27.3% (75 min) to 40% (85 min) of buffer B while the first part   of this gradient – from 5% to 27.3% of buffer B – had the same slope as a 5-to-40%B gradient.   The column and precolumn were regenerated between runs by the wash with 95% of buffer B   for 7 min and equilibrated with 5% of buffer B for 25 min. Between the samples to ensure the   absence of crosstalk both the column and the precolumn were thoroughly washed with a trap- elute gradient that included five cycles consisted of the following steps: 5% (0 min time point) to   95% (3 min time point) to 95% (6 min time point) to 5% (7 min time point) to 5% (10 min time   point – the 0 min time point of the next cycle) of buffer B. Information-dependent mass-spectrometer experiment included 1 survey MS1 scan   followed by 50 dependent MS2 scans. MS1 acquisition parameters were as follows: mass   range for analysis and subsequent ion selection for MS2 analysis was 300-1250 m/z, signal   accumulation time was 250 ms. Ions for MS2 analysis were selected on the basis of intensity   with the threshold of 250 cps and the charge state from 2 to 5. MS2 acquisition parameters   were as follows: resolution of quadrupole wasset to UNIT (0.7 Da), measurement mass range   was 200-1800 m/z, optimization of ion beam focus was to obtain maximal sensitivity, signal   accumulation time was 50 ms for each parent ion. Collision activated dissociation was performed   with nitrogen gas with collision energy ramping from from 25 to 55 V within 50 ms signal   accumulation time. Analyzed parent ions were sent to dynamic exclusion list for 15 sec in order   to get an MS2 spectra at the chromatographic peak apex (minimum peak width throughout the   gradient was about 30 s).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification we used the Mascot search engine v2.2.07 against Swiss-Prot sequence database. Before Mascot searches the raw LC/MS-MS datasets were converted to Mascot Generic Format using AB SCIEX MS Data Converter v1.3. The Mascot searches were conducted with the following parameters:tryptic digestion, the peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, variable modifications caused by Oxidation(M) and Carbomidimethylation(C), maximum one missed cleavages, the taxonomy was selected as Homosapiens.

### Publication Abstract
The fragilysin (BFT) is a protein secreted by enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis strains. BFT contains zinc-binding motif which was found in the metzincins family of metalloproteinases. In this study, we generated three known recombinant isoforms of BFT using Escherichia coli, tested their activity and examined whether E-cadherin is a substrate for BFTs. BFT treatment of HT-29 cells induced endogenous E-cadherin cleavage, and this BFT activity requires the native structure of zinc-binding motif. At the same time recombinant BFTs did not cleave recombinant E-cadherin or E-cadherin in isolated cell fractions. It indicates that E-cadherin may be not direct substrate for BFT. We also detected and identified proteins released into the cultural medium after HT-29 cells treatment with BFT. The role of these proteins in pathogenesis and cell response to BFT remains to be determined.

### Keywords
Bft, Ht-29, Fragilysin

### Affiliations
D.Sc., associate professor Head of Laboratory of Genetic Engineering Research Institute of Physical-Chemical Medicine
Research Institute of Physical Chemical Medicine

### Submitter
Ilya Altukhov

### Lab Head
Dr Vasiliy Lazarev
D.Sc., associate professor Head of Laboratory of Genetic Engineering Research Institute of Physical-Chemical Medicine


