### Accession
PXD035692

### Title
Coronary alarmins as residual risk markers of atherosclerosis under hypolipidemic therapy

### Description
Increased levels of low-density lipoproteins are the main risk factor in the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis. Although statin treatment can effectively lower these levels, there is still a residual risk of cardiovascular events. A more recent therapy, with encouraging results, to regulate the low-density lipoproteins levels, has been represented by the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibition, a protein with critical role in lipid metabolism.Alarmins are endogenous danger signals that are released or secreted from damaged or dead/dying cells as a result of various insults. These stress-sensing molecules have been correlated with various inflammatory states or diseases. We hypothesize that a specific panel of alarmins could indicate the persistence of silent atherosclerosis residual risk.

### Sample Protocol
30 mg of interventricular myocardial tissue, containing part of the left descending coronary artery was homogenized in 0.3 mL lysis buffer containing 8M urea, 1% DOC and 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and Protease Inhibitor Cocktail I (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), on ice, using a rotor-stator mechanical homogenizer (Polytron PT 1300D, Kinematica, Malters, Switzerland). Following a powerful centrifugation (10000xg, 10 min. and 4 °C) the protein supernatant was used for protein level determination (Pierce BCA Protein Assay, Thermo Scientific). 50 µg of protein from each sample were purified through acetone precipitation (1:4 ratio of protein sample to ice cold acetone, 2h, -28 ºC), separated after a 20-minute, 20000 x g centrifugation, at 4 ºC, and after the supernatant was discarder, the protein pellet was resuspended in a reducing buffer containing 8M urea, 0.1M Tris-HCl, 0.1mM EDTA and 20mM DTT. The cysteine residues were alkylated using iodoacetamide (80mM), followed by N-acetyl-L-cysteine (80mM) quenching. Over-night proteolysis was performed using sequencing grade modified Trypsin Gold (Madison, USA) in a 1:20 enzyme to substrate ratio, at 37°C, under basic conditions (pH 8.5). For salt removal, we purified the peptides through solid phase extraction, using C18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA). The eluate was evaporated using the Concentrator Plus system from Eppendorf (Hamburg, Germany) and the dried peptide mixtures were resuspended in a solution containing 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water. We used the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific) to determine peptide quantity and inject equal amounts from each sample (1 µg/replicate).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) was used for protein inference and relative quantification. Sequest HT was preferred as search engine in Oryctolagus cuniculus Uniprot database. Methionine oxidation was set as dynamic modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static one, allowing 2 missed cleavages for in silico proteolysis. An in-house contaminant database was used to recognize and filter out common protein contaminants. Label free relative quantification was performed using the precursor ion quantifier node and was based on the intensity of the unique peptide precursors from 90% of replicate features. Normalization was performed on total peptide amount, while scaling parameter was set on the controls average. Protein abundances were calculated as the average of the most abundant distinct peptide groups, while the protein ratio was directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances. The statistical significance of the quantification ratio comparison was calculated using the ANOVA hypothesis test. STRING freeware (v.11.0) was used for creating interaction-based networks and accession to KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) and Gene Ontology databases.

### Publication Abstract
Increased levels of low-density lipoproteins are the main risk factor in the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis. Although statin treatment can effectively lower these levels, there is still a residual risk of cardiovascular events. We hypothesize that a specific panel of stress-sensing molecules (alarmins) could indicate the persistence of silent atherosclerosis residual risk. New Zealand White rabbits were divided into: control group (C), a group that received a high-fat diet for twelve weeks (Au), and a treated hyperlipidemic group with a lipid diet for eight weeks followed by a standard diet and hypolipidemic treatment (atorvastatin and PCSK9 siRNA-inhibitor) for four weeks (Asi). Mass spectrometry experiments of left ventricle lysates were complemented by immunologic and genomic studies to corroborate the data. The hyperlipidemic diet determined a general alarmin up-regulation tendency over the C group. A significant spectral abundance increase was measured for specific heat shock proteins, S100 family members, HMGB1, and Annexin A1. The hypolipidemic treatment demonstrated a reversed regulation trend with non-significant spectral alteration over the C group for some of the identified alarmins. Our study highlights the discriminating potential of alarmins in hyperlipidemia or following hypolipidemic treatment. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD035692.

### Keywords
Alarmins, Residual risk, Atherosclerosis, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu"
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology

### Submitter
Felicia Antohe

### Lab Head
Dr Felicia Antohe
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology


