### Accession
PXD013744

### Title
Glyphosate_proteomics -  Glyphosate does not substitute for glycine in proteins of actively dividing mammalian cells

### Description
This is a first analysis of potential direct or indirect effects of glyphosate on protein post-translational modification in mammalian cell culture, using TMT labelling to control for false discoveries. Potential effects on the global proteome were also investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed (PBS, 4% SDS, 25 mM TCEP, 1X complete EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche)) with 3*5s sonication on ice followed by heating at 95°C for 10min. Samples were alkylated with N-ethylmaleimide (50 mM) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature, centrifuged at 17,000 g and the pellet discarded. Proteins were precipitated (with methanol-chloroform), dissolved in 100 µL of 0.1 M TEAB, 8 M urea, diluted 1:4 (urea to 2 M) and digested at 37°C overnight with LysC (Wako). Samples were further diluted 1:2.5 (urea 0.8 M) and digested at 37°C for 16h with trypsin (Pierce/Thermo). The digestion was stopped by adding TFA (to a final concentration of 1%). Digested peptide samples were desalted (tC18 SepPak plate, Waters), and 100 µg of each were labelled with TMT-6plex (Thermo). Labelled peptides were combined, dried, reconstituted in 1% TFA, desalted again as above, dried, and reconstituted in 5% Formic Acid. The TMT labelled sample was analysed by RPLC-MS/MS/MS (145 min linear gradient) on a Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap operating in Data Dependent Acquisition mode (MultiNotch Simultaneous Precursor Selection method; MS1: profile mode, Orbitrap resolution 120k, 400-1600 m/z, AGC target 400,000, 100 ms max. injection time, RF lens 60%; MS2: centroid mode, IonTrap, 10 dependent scans, 1.2 Th isolation window, charge states 2-6, 60 s dynamic exclusion, CID fragmentation (35%, activation Q 0.25), AGC target 10,000, 70 ms max. injection time; MS3: profile mode, 5 precursors, 2 Th isolation window, Orbitrap resolution 30k, 100-500 m/z, AGC target 50,000, 105 ms max. injection time, HCD fragmentation (55%)).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw file was searched with MaxQuant (1.6.0.13) against a human proteome Fasta database downloaded from UniProtKB. Because there was a single file to search, this allowed more variable modifications than normal without the search becoming impractically long. Variable modifications included in the search were “M-oxidation”, “N-terminal acetylation”, “deamidation (NQ)”, “Gln->pyroGlu”, “Phospho (STY)”, as well as two putative glyphosate-induced modifications: “A1” = Glyoxylate-modified Cysteine (+H2O3C2 => expected monoisotopic mass shift +74.0003939305 Da) and “A2” = Glycine replaced by Glyphosate (+H3O3CP => expected monoisotopic mass shift +93.9819804726 Da); finally, “N-Ethylmaleimide” was unusually set as a variable modification (no fixed modifications) since it would compete with modification “A1” for the same sites. All false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 1%. Dependent peptide search was ticked. Following MaxQuant analysis, data was reprocessed starting from the level of individual evidences for modified peptides (peptidoforms) using DC Biosciences’ TMT-labelled data processing scripts. Briefly, the Levenberg Marquardt procedure was applied by column to normalise samples. Peptidoform reporter intensities were calculated as the sum of those of individual evidences and re-normalised as above. Peptide ratios were calculated (glyphosate vs average control), re-normalised as above, and summarized at protein groups level using an in house, mean based algorithm. Protein groups with a single identified peptidoform were excluded from the analysis. Moderated Welch’s t-tests were calculated and, in order to address the multiple hypothesis testing problem, p-value significance thresholds for 10, 20 and 30% False Discovery Rate were identified using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Thresholds for significant ratios (fold change) were defined as the 5% upper and 5% lower tails of the ratios between individual controls and average control samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glyphosate glyoxylate glycine protein modification tmt

### Affiliations
King's College London
DC Biosciences

### Submitter
Armel Nicolas

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Antoniou
King's College London


