### Accession
PXD003534

### Title
Adjuvant Secretomes -  Adjuvant-induced human monocyte secretome profiles reveal adjuvant- and age-specific protein signatures

### Description
Adjuvant-induced human monocyte secretome profiles reveal adjuvant- and age-specific protein signatures.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were analyzed on a nanoflow ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Eksigent/Sciex; Framingham, MA) hyphenated with a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive; Thermo Scientific; San Jose, CA). Peptides were loaded onto an in-house packed 100 μm i.d. × 15 cm C18 column (Magic C18, 5 μm, 200Å; Michrom Bioresource; Auburn, CA) and separated at 400 nl/min (linear gradients from 5 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid). Full MS scans were obtained in an Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 350–2000 range with resolution 70,000 (m/z 200) and a target value of 3 x 106. The 10 most intense peaks (charge state ≥ 2) were fragmented in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) collision cell at normalized collision energy of 27%, and tandem mass spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution 17500 at m/z 200 and a target value of 2 x 105. The ion selection threshold was 1.7 x 103, the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 millisecond (ms) for full MS scans and 120 ms for tandem mass spectrum. For each MS run, XCalibur software (version 2.2; Thermo Scientific) was used to generate RAW files, which were then converted to Mascot Generic Files (MGF) through an in-house script, extracting the 200 most intense fragment ions for each MS/MS spectrum.

### Data Protocol
All peak list files (MGFs) were analyzed using the Mascot (Matrix Science; London, UK; version 2.3.02) and X!Tandem search engines (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Mascot was configured to search the Uniprot human sequence database (35,806 entries as of May 2011), assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin with one missed cleavage allowed. Searches were conducted with fixed modification for carbamidomethyl; variable methionine oxidation and variable pyroGlu formation (from N-terminal Glu and Gln); monoisotopic mass with peptide precursor mass tolerance of 10 parts per million (ppm); MS/MS ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Dalton (Da).

### Publication Abstract
Adjuvants boost vaccine responses, enhancing protective immunity against infections that are most common among the very young. Many adjuvants activate innate immunity, some via Toll-Like Receptors (TLRs), whose activities varies with age. Accordingly, characterization of age-specific adjuvant-induced immune responses may inform rational adjuvant design targeting vulnerable populations. In this study, we employed proteomics to characterize the adjuvant-induced changes of secretomes from human newborn and adult monocytes in response to Alum, the most commonly used adjuvant in licensed vaccines; Monophosphoryl Lipid A (MPLA), a TLR4-activating adjuvant component of a licensed Human Papilloma Virus vaccine; and R848 an imidazoquinoline TLR7/8 agonist that is a candidate adjuvant for early life vaccines. Monocytes were incubated in vitro for 24 h with vehicle, Alum, MPLA, or R848 and supernatants collected for proteomic analysis employing liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) (data available via ProteomeXchange, ID PXD003534). 1894 non-redundant proteins were identified, of which &#x223c;30 - 40% were common to all treatment conditions and &#x223c;5% were treatment-specific. Adjuvant-stimulated secretome profiles, as identified by cluster analyses of over-represented proteins, varied with age and adjuvant type. Adjuvants, especially Alum, activated multiple innate immune pathways as assessed by functional enrichment analyses. Release of lactoferrin, pentraxin 3, and matrix metalloproteinase-9 was confirmed in newborn and adult whole blood and blood monocytes stimulated with adjuvants alone or adjuvanted licensed vaccines with distinct clinical reactogenicity profiles. MPLA-induced adult monocyte secretome profiles correlated in silico with transcriptome profiles induced in adults immunized with the MPLA-adjuvanted RTS,S malaria vaccine (Mosquirix&#x2122;). Overall, adjuvants such as Alum, MPLA and R848 give rise to distinct and age-specific monocyte secretome profiles, paralleling responses to adjuvant-containing vaccines in vivo Age-specific in vitro modeling coupled with proteomics may provide fresh insight into the ontogeny of adjuvant action thereby informing targeted adjuvanted vaccine development for distinct age groups.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Adjuvants, Secretome

### Affiliations
Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School
Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Sebastian Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Hanno Steen, Ofer Levy
Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School


