### Accession
PXD038065

### Title
Fucosylation of HLA-DRB1 regulates CD4+T cell-mediated anti-melanoma immunity and enhances immunotherapy efficacy: CD4+ T Cell Phosphoproteomics

### Description
Immunotherapy efficacy is limited in melanoma, and combinations of immunotherapies with other modalities have yielded limited improvements but also adverse events requiring cessation of treatment. In addition to ineffective patient stratification, efficacy is impaired by paucity of intratumoral immune cells (itICs)—thus, effective strategies to safely increase itICs are needed. We report that dietary administration of L-fucose induces fucosylation and cell surface enrichment of the MHC-II protein HLA-DRB1 in melanoma cells, triggering CD4+T cell-mediated increases in ItICs and anti-tumor immunity, enhancing immune checkpoint blockade responses. Melanoma fucosylation and fucosylated HLA-DRB1 associate with intratumoral T cell abundance and anti-PD1 responder status in patient melanoma specimens, suggesting the potential use of melanoma fucosylation as a strategy for stratifying patients for immunotherapies. Our findings demonstrate that fucosylation is a key mediator of anti-tumor immunity, and importantly, suggest that L-fucose is a powerful agent for safely increasing ItICs and immunotherapy efficacy in melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
CD4+T cells cultured and treated as indicated in the main text were harvested and lysed in standard RIPA buffer + protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Protein concentration was estimated by BCA assay (Bio-Rad) and 1 mg lysates were subjected to trypsin digestion. Briefly, lysates were reduced with 4.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 600C, alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature in the dark for 20 minutes, and digested overnight at 370C with 1:20 enzyme-to-protein ratio of trypsin (Worthington). The resulting peptide solution was de-salted using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and lyophilized for 48 hours.   Phosphopeptide enrichment by IMAC Fe-NTA Magnetic beads: The lyophilized peptides were enriched for global phosphopeptides (pSTY) using IMAC Fe-NTA magnetic beads (Cell Signaling Technology, #20432). Enrichment were carried out on a KingFisherTM Flex Purification System (Thermo Fisher, #24074441). The enriched peptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac and suspended in 15 μL loading buffer (5 % ACN and 0.1% TFA) prior to auto sampling.  Tryptic peptides were analyzed using a nanoflow ultra-high-performance liquid chromatograph and an electrospray orbitrap mass spectrometer (RSLCnano and Q Exactive Plus, Thermo, San Jose, CA) for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing. The peptide mixtures were loaded onto a pre-column (100 µm ID x 2 cm column packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 5 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. For LC-MS/MS, solvent A was composed of 98% ddH2O and 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA, and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile and 10% ddH2O containing 0.1% FA. The trapped peptides were eluted and separated on a 75 µm ID × 50 cm C18 analytical column, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size (Thermo), using a 90-minute gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min of 2% to 3% solvent B over 5 minutes, 3 to 30% solvent B over 27 minutes, then 30% to 38.5% solvent B over 5 minutes, 38.5% to 90% solvent B over 3 minutes, then held at 90% for 3 minutes, followed by 90% to 2% solvent B in 1 minute and re-equilibrated for 18 minutes. MS resolution was set at 70,000 and MS/MS resolution was set at 17,500 with max IT of 50 ms. The top sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) following each survey scan and 60 second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 67  software (version 1.6.2.10) was used to identify and quantify the proteins for the DDA runs.  Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages; phosphorylation of serine. threonine, and tyrosine as well as methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamidomethylation were allowed as post-translational modifications.  The first search peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm with 4.5 ppm mass tolerance for MaxQuant recalibrated peptides.  False discovery rate was set to 1%.  Similar searches were performed in Mascot for this upload.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Immunotherapy, Fucosylation, Melanoma, Cd4 t cells

### Affiliations
Tumor Biology Department Molecular Medicine Program Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Lau, PhD
Tumor Biology Department Molecular Medicine Program Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


