### Accession
PXD012824

### Title
Proteomics of slow and fast human muscle fibers reveals extensive fiber type-specific adaptations in response to exercise training

### Description
Skeletal muscle plays an important role in the health-promoting effects of exercise training, yet the underlying mechanisms are not fully elucidated. Proteomics of skeletal muscle is challenging due to presence of non-muscle tissues and existence of different fiber types confounding the results. This can be circumvented by analysis of pure fibers; however this requires isolation of fibers from fresh tissues. We developed a workflow enabling proteomics analysis of isolated muscle fibers from freeze-dried muscle biopsies and identified >4000 proteins. We investigated effects of exercise training on the pool of slow and fast muscle fibers. Exercise altered expression of >500 proteins irrespective of fiber type covering several metabolic processes, mainly related to mitochondria. Furthermore, exercise training altered proteins involved in regulation of post-translational modifications, transcription, Ca++ signaling, fat, and glucose metabolism in a fiber type-specific manner. Our data serves as a valuable resource for elucidating molecular mechanisms underlying muscle performance and health. Finally, our workflow offers methodological advancement allowing proteomic analyses of already stored freeze-dried human muscle biopsies.

### Sample Protocol
From human primary muscle cells and slow and fast muscle fiber pools, proteins were precipitated using cold acetone (4 times the volume of the sample) incubation over night (-20 °C). Samples were centrifuged (3*10 min, 4°C, 16,000 g) and washed in 80% cold acetone. The precipitates were dissolved in 200 µL UREA buffer (8M UREA in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and processed according to the MED-FASP (multiple enzyme digestion with filter-aided sample preparation) protocol using the endoproteinases LysC and trypsin (Wiśniewski and Mann, 2012). Briefly, on a FASP filter, protein precipitates from the human muscle cells and muscle fiber pools were alkylated using iodoacetamide (IAA) and digested using LysC for 18 at room temperature. LysC peptides were filtered and collected. Undigested proteins on the filter were washed with water and further digested using trypsin for 6 hr at 37 ºC. Tryptic peptides were filtered and collected in a separate tube. Both LysC and tryptic peptides were purified on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Peptides were measured using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an Easy nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Scheltema et al., 2014). Purified peptides were separated on 50 cm C10 column (inner diameter 75 µm, 1.8 µm beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto the column with buffer A (0.5% formic acid) and eluted with a 180 min linear gradient from 2-60% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid). After the gradient, the column was washed with 90% buffer B and reequilibrated with buffer A. Mass spectra were aquired in a data dependent manner with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS using a top 15 method. MS spectra were aquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300-1750 m/z and 60,000 resolutions at m/z 200. HCD peptide fragment aquired at 27 normalized collision energy were analyzed at high resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) (http://www.maxquant.org). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine (integrated into MaxQuant) against the decoy UniProt-human database with forward and reverse sequences. In the main Andromeda search precursor, mass and fragment mass were matched with an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed. The FDR was 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. MS runs from skeletal muscle fibers and human muscle cells were analyzed with the ‘match between runs’ option. This feature uses accurate liquid chromatography (LC) retention time alignments to transfer identification from a peptide library obtained from human primary muscle cells, enabling successful fragmentation and identification of low-abundant muscle peptide and proteins more likely. For matching, a retention time window of 30 sec was selected. When all identified peptides were shared between two proteins, results were combined and reported as one protein group. Matches to the reverse database were excluded. Protein quantification was based on the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into the MaxQuant software (Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glucose metabolism, Mitochondrial biogenesis, Transcription, Glycogen, Mhc, Proteome, Fiber type

### Affiliations
NNF center for protein research, faculty of health and medical sciences. Copenhagen university, copenhagen.
Copenhagen University

### Submitter
atul shahaji deshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
NNF center for protein research, faculty of health and medical sciences. Copenhagen university, copenhagen.


