### Accession
PXD037057

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic analysis of autophagosomes derived from Leishmania infected macrophages

### Description
Autophagy has been implicated as a host defense mechanism against intracellular pathogens. However, certain intracellular pathogens such as Leishmania can manipulate the host’s autophagy to promote their survival. Recently, our findings regarding the regulation of autophagy by Leishmania donovani indicate that this pathogen induces non-classical autophagy in infected macrophages, independent of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 regulation. This occurs in the background of enhanced mTOR activity, which suggests the fine-tuning of autophagy to optimally promote parasite survival and may involve the sequestration or modulation of specific autophagosome-associated proteins. To investigate how Leishmania potentially manipulates the composition of host-cell autophagosomes, we undertook a quantitative proteomic study of the human monocytic cell line THP-1 following infection with L. donovani. We used stable isotope labeling by amino acid in cell culture and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to compare expression profiles between autophagosomes isolated from THP-1 cells infected with L. donovani or treated with known autophagy inducers. Select proteomics results were validated by immunoblotting. In this study, we showed that L. donovani modulates the composition of macrophage autophagosomes during infection when compared to autophagosomes induced by either rapamycin (selective autophagy) or starvation (non-selective autophagy). Among 1787 proteins detected in Leishmania-induced autophagosomes, 146 were significantly modulated compared to the proteome of rapamycin-induced autophagosomes while 57 were significantly modulated compared to starvation-induced autophagosomes. Strikingly, 23 Leishmania proteins were also detected in the proteome of Leishmania-induced autophagosomes. Together, our data provide the first comprehensive insight into the proteome dynamics of host autophagosomes in response to Leishmania infection and demonstrate the complex relations between the host and pathogen at the molecular level.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 cells were labelled with either normal L-lysine and L-arginine (“light”), L-lysine-2H4 and L-arginine-13C6 (“medium”), or L-lysine-13C6-15N2 and L-arginine-13C6-15N4 (“heavy”) amino acids. The “light” cell population was treated with rapamycin, the “medium” cell population was infected with Leishmania donovani¸ and the “heavy” cell population was amino acid-starved and treated with bafilomycin A1. For autophagosome purification, cells from all three treatments were pooled, then lysed using Dounce homogenization. Cellular components were removed through several rounds of differential centrifugation and autophagosomes were further purified from other cellular vesicles through iodixanol density gradient ultracentrifugation. Proteins from the autophagosome-containing fraction of the density gradient were concentrated via sodium deoxycholate - trichloroacetic acid precipitation. Concentrated proteins were reduced and alkylated prior to running on 10% SDS-PAGE. Proteins were split into 5 fractions and digested in gel with MS-grade trypsin (Promega) and the resulting peptides were cleaned on C-18 Stop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips. Peptides were analyzed on NanoDrop One (Thermo Fisher - A205, scopes) to load approximately 300 ng of fractionated peptides on Bruker Impact II Qtof coupled to Thermo easy nLC 1200. Ionopticks’s Aurora series 25 cm x 75 um C18 1.6um column heated to 50℃ was used for a 90 min separation with acquisition settings as described.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were searched on MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 [33] against UniProt’s human sequences (UP000005640, downloaded April 12, 2019), Leishmania donovani BPK282A1, and common contaminant sequences. SILAC labels of medium arginine (13C6), medium lysine (2H4), heavy arginine (13C6, 15N4), and heavy lysine (13C6, 15N2) were set for quantitation with “iBAQ”, “requantify”, and “match-between-runs” options enabled. The data were filtered for 1% false discovery at protein, peptide, and PSM levels.

### Publication Abstract
Recently, autophagy has been implicated as a host defense mechanism against intracellular pathogens. On the other hand, certain intracellular pathogens such as Leishmania can manipulate the host's autophagy to promote their survival. Our recent findings regarding the regulation of autophagy by Leishmania donovani indicate that this pathogen induces non-classical autophagy in infected macrophages, independent of regulation by the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1. This suggests the fine-tuning of autophagy to optimally promote parasite survival, possibly by the sequestration or modulation of specific autophagosome-associated proteins. To investigate how Leishmania potentially manipulates the composition of host-cell autophagosomes, we undertook a quantitative proteomic study of the human monocytic cell line THP-1 following infection with L. donovani. We used stable isotope labeling by amino acid in cell culture and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to compare expression profiles between autophagosomes isolated from THP-1 cells infected with L. donovani or treated with known autophagy inducers. Selected proteomic results were validated by Western blotting. In this study, we showed that L. donovani modulates the composition of macrophage autophagosomes during infection when compared to autophagosomes induced by either rapamycin (selective autophagy) or starvation (non-selective autophagy). Among 1787 proteins detected in Leishmania-induced autophagosomes, 146 were significantly modulated compared to the proteome of rapamycin-induced autophagosomes, while 57 were significantly modulated compared to starvation-induced autophagosomes. Strikingly, 23 Leishmania proteins were also detected in the proteome of Leishmania-induced autophagosomes. Together, our data provide the first comprehensive insight into the proteome dynamics of host autophagosomes in response to Leishmania infection and demonstrate the complex relations between the host and pathogen at the molecular level. A comprehensive analysis of the Leishmania-induced autophagosome proteome will be instrumental in the advancement of understanding leishmaniasis.

### Keywords
Lcmsms, Leishmania donovani, Parasitic infection, Autophagosome, Autophagy, Host-pathogen interactions

### Affiliations
Deparment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard J. Foster
Deparment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada


