### Accession
PXD038531

### Title
Impact of rhamnolipids (RLs), natural defense elicitors, on shoot and root proteomes of Brassica napus by a Tandem Mass tags (TMTs) labeling approach

### Description
The rapeseed crop (Brassica napus) is valued mainly for animal feed, food oil and biofuel production. This plant is particularly susceptible to many pathogens like parasitic plants, fungi or animals attacking aerial or root parts. Conventional plant protection products, used intensively in agriculture, have a negative impact on the environment (air and water quality, biodiversity, etc.) as well as on human health. There is therefore a growing demand for the development of new, more planet-friendly alternative protection methods such as biocontrol compounds. Natural rhamnolipids (RLs) can be used as elicitors of plant defense mechanisms. Indeed, these glycolipids, from bacteria secretome, are biodegradable, non-toxic and they are known for their stimulating and protective effects, in particular on rapeseed against filamentous fungi. Characterizing the organ responsiveness to defense stimulating compounds like RLs is missing. This analysis is crucial in the frame of optimizing the effectiveness of RLs against various diseases. A TMT labeling of the proteins extracted from the shoots and roots of B. napus has been performed and showed a differential pattern of protein abundance between them. These results have allowed identifying several protein families possibly involved in the differential responses observed in shoots and roots of rapeseed upon RLs treatment. In particular, quantitative proteomic analysis highlighted differential accumulation of parietal and cytoplasmic defense or stress proteins in response to treatments with RLs with a clear effect of the type of application (foliar spraying or root absorption). These results must be considered for further use of RLs to fight specific rapeseed pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Biological materials and culture conditions Seeds of Brassica napus cultivar Darmor-bzh were harvested in July 2019 and kept in the dark at 4°C. Seeds were sterilized according to Monnier et al. (2018). After 7 days, the seeds were placed on plant growth medium MS [Murashige & Skoog basal medium (Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, United States), 0.5 g L−1 MES (2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid), and 5 g L−1 sucrose] solidified with agar (7 g L−1) and equilibrated to pH 5.7. The seeds were placed for 10 days in a climatic chamber at 21°C, 60% relative humidity, 150 μmol m-2 s-1 light intensity with a 16 hours photoperiod. Ten-day-old seedlings were transferred to 4.3 g L-1 MS liquid medium with 0.5 g L-1 MES, pH 5.7. The tubes containing the seedlings were placed for 24 hours under see-through plastic in the climatic chamber at 22°C the day and 18°C the night, 45% relative humidity with a 16 hours photoperiod.  Preparation of RLs solutions and application The RLs solutions were prepared at 0.1 g L-1 from a 90% RLs mix (reference R90, AGAE Technologies, Corvalis, USA) according to Monnier et al (2018). After 24 hours of acclimation in MS liquid medium, the solution of RLs was sprayed on the aerial parts and for root application, the seedlings were transferred into MS medium with 0.1 g L-1 RLs. Thirty control (without treatment) and treated RLs plantlets are were collected. The shoots and the roots were harvested after 7 h or 24 h. Samples were immediately placed in liquid nitrogen, ground to fine powder in a ball mill and stored at -80°C until proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were extracted from the shoots and roots using iST sample preparation kit (Preomics, Planegg/Martinsried, Germany) using manufactor’s recommandations. Proteins were identified and quantified using a Tandem Mass Tags (TMTs)-based comparative proteomics analysis method (Leschevin et al., 2021). These experiments were performed on three biological replicates. Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) before being run against Brassica napus TrEmbl database. To identify differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs), the results were classified according to the ratio of proteins amounts in shoots treated with RLs vs control and roots treated with RLs vs control at T7 (7 h of treatment), T24 according to foliar spraying and root application. DAPs were defined as proteins with a fold change >1.7 or <0.6 at a p-value <0.05 between two comparison groups (shoot-RLs-T7-foliar spraying vs shoot without RLs-T7, root-RLs-T7-foliar spraying vs root without RLs-T7, shoot-RLs-T7-root application vs shoot without RLs-T7, root-RLs-T7-root application vs root without RLs-T7). The same comparison groups were analysed for the 24 h treatments.  Functionnal annotation of DAPs was performed using Blast2GO (https://www.blast2go.com) and Uniprot database (https://www.uniprot.org).The peptides sepquences of all DAPs were extracted and submitted to NCBI for BLAST search (https://blast.ncbi.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) using default parameters, with B. napus as the organism filter. The protein families were also reclassified according to literature informations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Tmt labeling, Rapeseed, Biological control, Rhamnolipids

### Affiliations
Université de Picardie Jules Verne
ICAP Facility Université de Picardie Jules Verne

### Submitter
Paulo MARCELO

### Lab Head
Dr Paulo MARCELO
ICAP Facility Université de Picardie Jules Verne


