### Accession
PXD032313

### Title
A comparison of blood plasma exosome enrichment strategies for proteomic analysis.

### Description
Proteomic analysis of exosomes (EXs) poses a significant challenge. A ‘gold-standard’ method for plasma EX enrichment for downstream proteomic analysis is yet to be established. Methods were evaluated for their capacity to successfully isolate and enrich EXs from plasma, minimise the presence of highly abundant plasma proteins, and result in the optimum representation of exosomal (EXal) proteins by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Plasma from four cattle (Bos taurus) of similar physical attributes and genetics were used. Three methods of EX enrichment were utilised: ultracentrifugation (UC), size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), and ultrafiltration (UF). These methods were combined to create four groups for methodological evaluation: UC+SEC, UC+SEC+UF, SEC+UC and SEC+UF. The UC+SEC method yielded the highest number of protein IDs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion Pooled EX-enriched samples (fractions 7 – 10) for each biological replicate were combined for each method to create one master pool per method, and the master pools were processed for MS analysis using a modified filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Briefly, a volume of protein extract corresponding to 10 – 20 µg total protein was mixed 1:1 with 1% w/v SDC lysis buffer containing 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 100 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.5). Samples were loaded onto a centrifugal device with 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter (30K Nanosep Centrifugal Device with Omega Membrane, PALL) and processed for LC-MS/MS by on-filter alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and 8M Urea. Overnight enzymatic digestion was performed on-filter by adding trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. Following overnight tryptic digestion, digested peptide samples were eluted into clean 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes prior to desalting. Peptide desalting To acidify peptide digests prior to desalting, 4% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution was added to eluted peptides at a 1:1 ratio. Acidified peptide digests were desalted using a double SCX membrane StageTip. Peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac, Eppendorf) and reconstituted in 20 μL indexed retention time (iRT) buffer (Biognosys-11).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification ProteinPilot (v. 5.0.2.0, 5346) was used to process individual MS data files using Paragon Algorithm (v. 5.0.2.0, 5174). Spectra were searched against a combined cattle proteome (23,847 sequences, downloaded Aug 2020, available in fasta format, Uniprot), cRAP sequences (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP) and iRT peptides file. The following search parameters were entered: urea denatur- ation, alkylation with iodoacetamide, species “none,” amino acid substitution, thorough ID, and false discovery rate (FDR) analysis 0.01. The protein list was exported to a.xls file, which was subject to an additional refinement. The final list of pro- teins for each method required a minimum of two peptides per protein ID (1% FDR at the protein level; 5% FDR at the peptide level).

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic analysis of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) poses a significant challenge. A 'gold-standard' method for plasma sEV enrichment for downstream proteomic analysis is yet to be established. Methods were evaluated for their capacity to successfully isolate and enrich sEVs from plasma, minimise the presence of highly abundant plasma proteins, and result in the optimum representation of sEV proteins by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Plasma from four cattle (Bos taurus) of similar physical attributes and genetics were used. Three methods of sEV enrichment were utilised: ultracentrifugation (UC), size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), and ultrafiltration (UF). These methods were combined to create four groups for methodological evaluation: UC + SEC, UC + SEC + UF, SEC + UC and SEC + UF. The UC + SEC method yielded the highest number of protein identifications (IDs). The SEC + UC method reduced plasma protein IDs compared to the other methods, but also resulted in the lowest number of protein IDs overall. The UC + SEC + UF method decreased sEV protein ID, particle number, mean and mode particle size, particle yield, and did not improve purity compared to the UC + SEC method. In this study, the UC + SEC method was the best method for sEV protein ID, purity, and overall particle yield. Our data suggest that the method and sequence of sEV enrichment strategy impacts protein ID, which may influence the outcome of biomarker discovery studies.

### Keywords
Exosome; isolation; enrichment; ultracentrifugation; size-exclusion chromatography; ultrafiltration; mass-spectrometry; proteomics; extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Queensland University of Technology
CARF Proteomics and Small Molecule Mass Spectrometry, Queensland University of Technology

### Submitter
Natalie Turner

### Lab Head
Dr Pawel Sadowski
CARF Proteomics and Small Molecule Mass Spectrometry, Queensland University of Technology


