### Accession
PXD028935

### Title
Sodium carbonate extraction mass spectrometry reveals novel steps in mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III assembly

### Description
Mitochondria are complex organelles containing 13 proteins encoded by mitochondrial DNA and over 1000 proteins encoded on nuclear DNA. Many mitochondrial proteins are associated with the inner or outer mitochondrial membranes, either peripherally or as integral membrane proteins, while others reside in either of the two soluble mitochondrial compartments, the mitochondrial matrix and the intermembrane space. The biogenesis of the five complexes of the oxidative phosphorylation system are exemplars of this complexity. These large multi-subunit complexes are built through the tightly controlled coalescence of more than 80 proteins with both membrane integral and peripheral associations, with progression between different assembly steps dependent on soluble, membrane integral and peripherally associated assembly factor proteins. Understanding the membrane association of subunits and assembly factors during each assembly step is critical to understanding OXPHOS complex biogenesis. Here we couple sodium carbonate extraction with quantitative mass spectrometry to track changes in the membrane association of the mitochondrial proteome across multiple human complex III knockout cell lines. In addition to identifying the membrane association status of over 840 human mitochondrial proteins, we identify a previously undetected intermediate step of complex III biogenesis. Sodium carbonate extraction with quantitative mass spectrometry (SCE-MS) is thus an easy to apply tool with general utility in the study of mitochondrial respiratory chain biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T, UQCRC1KO, and UQCR10KO cells were cultured in DMEM for SILAC (Thermo Scientific, 88364), supplemented with 10% (v/v) dialyzed FCS (Thermo Scientific, 30067334), penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 50 μg ml−1 uridine (Sigma-Aldrich), 600 mg L-1 L-proline and, either regular ‘light’ or ‘heavy’ (13C615N2 lysine and 13C615N4-arginine) arginine and lysine (Silantes, 201604102 and 211604102) at the concentrations of 42 mg L-1 L-arginine and 146 mg L-1 L-lysine at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for at least 5 passages. Cells were collected, washed in PBS and counted. Samples were prepared in triplicate with a label switch. Equal numbers of HEK293T cells (2 independent samples grown in heavy DMEM and one grown in light DMEM) and knockout cells (1 sample grown in heavy DMEM and 2 independent samples grown in light DMEM) were mixed in heavy/light HEK293T/knockout pairs and used for isolation of mitochondria as previously described (Stroud et al., 2016). SILAC-labelled mitochondria were pelleted at 12,000 x g for 5 min at 4 °C before being resuspended in 100 mM Na2CO3, pH 9.5 or 11.5 and incubated on ice for 30 min. One fifth of the volume of each sample was aliquoted as the ‘Total’ fraction. The remainder was centrifuged at 125,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C to generate ‘Pellet’ and ‘Supernatant’ fractions. Peptides were prepared using the S-Trap system (HaileMariam et al., 2018) as per manufacturer’s instructions. The total fraction was solubilized using 1X S-Trap solubilization buffer while pellet and supernatant fractions were prepared using 3X S-Trap solubilization buffer. The total fraction samples were processed using Micro S-Trap columns, while the pellet and supernatant fractions were processed using Mini S-Trap columns. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a 1:25 trypsin:protein ratio overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted from S-Trap columns according to manufacturer’s instructions, prior to drying in a CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco, Kansas City, MO) and reconstitution in 0.1% TFA and 2% ACN for analysis by Liquid chromatography (LC) - MS/MS on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and NanoESI interface. The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected to the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% v/v CH3CN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid for 5 min applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 5% DMSO in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 5% DMSO in 100% v/v CH3CN and 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 0-6min at 3% B, (ii) 6-95 min, 3-22% B (iii) 95-105min 22-40% B (iv) 105-110min, 40-80% B (v) 110-115min, 80-80% B (vi) 115-117min, 80-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 minutes before the next sample injection. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode at 120000 resolution. The ‘top speed’ acquisition mode with 3 s cycle time on the most intense precursor ion was used, whereby ions with charge states of 2 to 7 were selected. MS/MS analyses were performed by 1.6 m/z isolation with the quadrupole, fragmented by HCD with collision energy of 30%. MS2 resolution was at 15000. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30 s. AGC target was set to standard with auto maximum injection mode. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30 s. For steady state analysis, SILAC labeled isolated mitochondria were prepared as described above, and peptides were prepared using Mini S-Trap columns (HaileMariam et al., 2018) as described above for analysis by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Eclipse. The LC was carried out as described above. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode at 120,000 resolution. The ‘top speed’ acquisition mode with 3 s cycle time on the most intense precursor ion was used, whereby ions with charge states of 2 to 7 were selected. MS/MS analyses were performed by 1.6 m/z isolation with the quadrupole, fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energy of 30 %. MS2 resolution was at 15,000. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30 s. AGC target was set to standard with auto maximum injection mode. Raw files were processed as described above, however without the “LFQ” option enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software package (Version 1.6.17.0, RRID:SCR_014485) (Tyanova et al., 2016a), and searched against the UniProt human database, including unreviewed proteins, (193557 entries, March 2021). For this search, Arg10 and Lys8 were set as the heavy labels and Trypsin/P cleavage specificity (cleaves after lysine or arginine, even when proline is present) was used with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The settings “LFQ,” “re-quant” and “Match between runs” were enabled with otherwise default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are complex organelles containing 13 proteins encoded by mitochondrial DNA and over 1,000 proteins encoded on nuclear DNA. Many mitochondrial proteins are associated with the inner or outer mitochondrial membranes, either peripherally or as integral membrane proteins, while others reside in either of the two soluble mitochondrial compartments, the mitochondrial matrix and the intermembrane space. The biogenesis of the five complexes of the oxidative phosphorylation system are exemplars of this complexity. These large multi-subunit complexes are comprised of more than 80 proteins with both membrane integral and peripheral associations and require soluble, membrane integral and peripherally associated assembly factor proteins for their biogenesis. Mutations causing human mitochondrial disease can lead to defective complex assembly due to the loss or altered function of the affected protein and subsequent destabilization of its interactors. Here we couple sodium carbonate extraction with quantitative mass spectrometry (SCE-MS) to track changes in the membrane association of the mitochondrial proteome across multiple human knockout cell lines. In addition to identifying the membrane association status of over 840 human mitochondrial proteins, we show how SCE-MS can be used to understand the impacts of defective complex assembly on protein solubility, giving insights into how specific subunits and sub-complexes become destabilized.

### Keywords
Respiratory chain assembly, Mitochondria, Membrane protein, Proteomic analysis, Oxphos (oxidative phosphorylation), Carbonate extraction

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry & Pharmacology, Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
Department of Biochemistry & Pharmacology, Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne


