### Accession
PXD041469

### Title
TFT3 interacts with MAPKKK by coimmunoprecipitation

### Description
Tomato MAPKKK interacts with the N. benthamiana homologue of TFT3. MAPKKK-HA was transiently expressed in N. benthamiana leaves and immunoprecipitated using -HA agarose beads. 12 unique peptides of N. benthamiana TFT3 homologue were identified by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Ustun S, Sheikh A, Gimenez-Ibanez S, Jones A, Ntoukakis V, Bornke F. The Proteasome Acts as a Hub for Plant Immunity and Is Targeted by Pseudomonas Type III Effectors. Plant Physiol 172, 1941-1958 (2016).

### Data Protocol
Ustun S, Sheikh A, Gimenez-Ibanez S, Jones A, Ntoukakis V, Bornke F. The Proteasome Acts as a Hub for Plant Immunity and Is Targeted by Pseudomonas Type III Effectors. Plant Physiol 172, 1941-1958 (2016).

### Publication Abstract
In both plants and animals, nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeat (NLR) immune receptors play critical roles in pathogen recognition and activation of innate immunity. In plants, NLRs recognise pathogen-derived effector proteins and initiate effector-triggered immunity (ETI). However, the molecular mechanisms that link NLR-mediated effector recognition and downstream signalling are not fully understood. By exploiting the well-characterised tomato Prf/Pto NLR resistance complex, we identified the 14-3-3 proteins TFT1 and TFT3 as interacting partners of both the NLR complex and the protein kinase MAPKKK&#x3b1;. Moreover, we identified the helper NRC proteins (NLR-required for cell death) as integral components of the Prf /Pto NLR recognition complex. Notably our studies revealed that TFTs and NRCs interact with distinct modules of the NLR complex and, following effector recognition, dissociate facilitating downstream signalling. Thus, our data provide a mechanistic link between activation of immune receptors and initiation of downstream signalling cascades.

### Keywords
Plant defecnce, Tomato

### Affiliations
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Alex Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Jones
University of Warwick


