### Accession
PXD007683

### Title
Proteome-wide evaluation of two common protein quantification methods

### Description
Proteomics experiments commonly aim to estimate and detect differential abundance across all expressed proteins. Within this experimental design, some of the most challenging measurements are small fold changes for lower abundance proteins. While bottom-up proteomics methods are approaching comprehensive coverage of even complex eukaryotic proteomes, failing to reliably quantify lower abundance proteins can limit the precision and reach of experiments to much less than the identified -let alone total- proteome. Here we test the ability of two common methods, a tandem mass tagging (TMT) method and a label- free quantitation method (LFQ), to achieve comprehensive quantitative coverage by benchmarking their capacity to measure 3 different levels of change (3-, 2-, and 1.5-fold) across an entire dataset.  Both methods achieved comparably accurate estimates for all three fold-changes.  However, the TMT method detected changes that reached statistical significance three times more often due to higher precision and fewer missing values.  These findings highlight the importance of refining proteome quantitation methods to bring the number of usefully quantified proteins into closer agreement with the number of total quantified proteins.

### Sample Protocol
LFQ pipeline.  Samples were de-salted via C-18 Stagetips. Eleven, 3-hr gradients were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were fractionated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ∼35 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific). For each analysis, we loaded 1 μg per sample onto the column. Peptides were separated using a 3 hr gradient of 6 to 26% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of ∼400 nL/min. Each analysis used the multi-notch MS3-based TMT method on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos.    Instrument settings: FTMS1 resolution (120,000), FTMS2 resolution (15,000), FTMS2 max ion time (100 ms), Isolation window (1.4 m/z), AGC setting (5E5), HCD energy (35%), dynamic exclusion window (90 sec).  A TOP10 method was used where each FTMS1 scan was used to select up to 10 FTMS2 precursors for interrogation by HCD-MS2 with readout in the orbitrap.  An average of 55,000 MS2 scans was collected in each 3hr run.   Samples were searched with MaxQuant (ver. 1.5.8.3) against a combined yeast and human database which was concatenated with their reversed sequences as decoys for FDR determination.  Searches restricted the precursor ion tolerance to 20 ppm, and product ion tolerance window was set to 0.5 m/z.  Searches allowed up to two missed cleavages, included static medication of lysine residues and peptide N-termini with TMT tags (+229.163 Da), static  carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da), variable oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da).   Results were filtered to a 1% FDR at the protein level with MaxQuant19.  Match-between-runs (MBR) was enabled with default settings across the 11 samples (match time window=0.7 min, alignment time window=20).  Quantification was via MaxQuant’s LFQ algorithm which combines and adjusts peptide intensities into a protein intensity value.   TMT pipeline.  The eleven TMT-labeled samples were mixed into a single sample and separated by basic pH RP HPLC. We used an Agilent 1100 pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector (set at 220 and 280 nm wavelength) from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Peptides were subjected to a 50 min linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min over an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (3.5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 220 mm in length). The peptide mixture was fractionated into a total of 96 fractions which were consolidated into 24 fractions. Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each eluted fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing.   Eleven fractions were used for 3-hr gradient separations as described above, but with the SPS-MS3 method on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos20,25.  Parameter settings:  FTMS1 resolution (120,000), ITMS2 isolation window (0.4 m/z), ITMS2 max ion time (120 ms), ITMS2 AGC (2E4), ITMS2 CID energy (35%), SPS ion count (up to 10), FTMS3 isolation window (0.4 m/z), FTMS3 max ion time (150 ms), FTMS3 AGC (1.5E5), FTMS3 resolution (50,000).  A TOP10 method was used where each FTMS1 scan was used to select up to 10 MS2 precursors for interrogation by CID-MS2 with readout in the ion trap.  Each MS2 was used to select precursors (SPS ions) for the MS3 scan which measured reporter ion abundance for the 11 samples simultaneously.  An average of 27,500 MS2/MS3 paired scans was collected in each run.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Samples were searched with the Sequest algorithm (Ver. 28) against a combined yeast and human database which was concatenated with their reversed sequences as decoys for FDR determination. Searches restricted the precursor ion tolerance to 50 ppm, and product ion tolerance window was set to 0.9 m/z. As for the LFQ analysis, searches allowed up to two missed cleavages, included static medication of lysine residues and peptide N-termini with TMT tags (+229.163 Da), static  carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da), variable oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da). Results were filtered to a 1% FDR at the peptide and protein levels using linear discriminant analysis and the target-decoy strategy.  MS3 spectra were processed as signal-to-noise ratios for each reporter ion based on noise levels within a 25 Th window. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion intensities across all matching PSMs. PSMs with low isolation specificity (<0.7), MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, or MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal to noise ratio that is less than 200 were removed.  Equal human protein starting amounts was enforced by normalizing to the sum of all human peptides for each of the 11 channels.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics experiments commonly aim to estimate and detect differential abundance across all expressed proteins. Within this experimental design, some of the most challenging measurements are small fold changes for lower abundance proteins. While bottom-up proteomics methods are approaching comprehensive coverage of even complex eukaryotic proteomes, failing to reliably quantify lower abundance proteins can limit the precision and reach of experiments to much less than the identified-let alone total-proteome. Here we test the ability of two common methods, a tandem mass tagging (TMT) method and a label-free quantitation method (LFQ), to achieve comprehensive quantitative coverage by benchmarking their capacity to measure 3 different levels of change (3-, 2-, and 1.5-fold) across an entire data set. Both methods achieved comparably accurate estimates for all 3-fold-changes. However, the TMT method detected changes that reached statistical significance three times more often due to higher precision and fewer missing values. These findings highlight the importance of refining proteome quantitation methods to bring the number of usefully quantified proteins into closer agreement with the number of total quantified proteins.

### Keywords
Maxquant, Lfq, Tmt

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


