### Accession
PXD043007

### Title
Increased Basal MET phosphorylation is a Hallmark of Hepatocyte Dysregulation in Liver Disease: Human

### Description
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is gaining evermore importance due to rapidly rising incidence rates especially in western countries. As the disease progresses, it can develop into hepatocellular carcinoma. Related metabolic changes have been extensively studied in the past. However, the molecular mechanisms responsible for the development of fatty liver disease remain uncovered. Here we show that the basal phosphorylation of the MET receptor can be used as an indicator for hepatocyte dysregulation in fatty liver disease. Using primary hepatocytes isolated from a preclinical model fed with high-fat, high-sugar diet (Western diet; WD) or standard diet (SD), we find a strong downregulation of the PI3K-AKT pathway and upregulation of the MAPK pathway in the WD derived hepatocytes. By developing a mathematical model of HGF-induced signal transduction, calibrated with quantitative time-resolved measurements of both PI3K-AKT and MAPK pathways, we resolve molecular mechanisms responsible for these alterations. Thereby, we identify the basal MET phosphorylation rate as main driver for the altered signal transduction in WD hepatocytes that even leads to an increased proliferation behavior of the usually quiescent hepatocytes in the absence of growth factors. The adaptation of the dynamic pathway model of HGF signal transduction to patient-derived hepatocytes reveals a patient-specific variability of basal MET phosphorylation levels, which correlates with the clinical outcome of patients after liver surgery. These findings suggest that the dysregulated basal MET phosphorylation could be exploited to assess the health status of the liver and thereby inform estimation of the risk of a patient to suffer from liver failure after surgery.Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is gaining evermore importance due to rapidly rising incidence rates especially in western countries. As the disease progresses, it can develop into hepatocellular carcinoma. Related metabolic changes have been extensively studied in the past. However, the molecular mechanisms responsible for the development of fatty liver disease remain uncovered. Here we show that the basal phosphorylation of the MET receptor can be used as an indicator for hepatocyte dysregulation in fatty liver disease. Using primary hepatocytes isolated from a preclinical model fed with high-fat, high-sugar diet (Western diet; WD) or standard diet (SD), we find a strong downregulation of the PI3K-AKT pathway and upregulation of the MAPK pathway in the WD derived hepatocytes. By developing a mathematical model of HGF-induced signal transduction, calibrated with quantitative time-resolved measurements of both PI3K-AKT and MAPK pathways, we resolve molecular mechanisms responsible for these alterations. Thereby, we identify the basal MET phosphorylation rate as main driver for the altered signal transduction in WD hepatocytes that even leads to an increased proliferation behavior of the usually quiescent hepatocytes in the absence of growth factors. The adaptation of the dynamic pathway model of HGF signal transduction to patient-derived hepatocytes reveals a patient-specific variability of basal MET phosphorylation levels, which correlates with the clinical outcome of patients after liver surgery. These findings suggest that the dysregulated basal MET phosphorylation could be exploited to assess the health status of the liver and thereby inform estimation of the risk of a patient to suffer from liver failure after surgery.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates of primary hepatocytes of unstimulated samples  were used for proteome analysis. Protein concentrations were determined by employing the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce,Thermo Fisher). In total, 20µg of protein per sample was used for further processing. The disulfide bonds of proteins were reduced with 40mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and then alkylated with 10mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 60min at 37°C. Protein digestion and clean-up were performed using an adapted version of the automated paramagnetic bead-based single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (Auto-SP3) protocol (Muller et al, 2020) on the Bravo liquid handling platform (Agilent). Briefly, for bead preparation, Sera-Mag Speed Beads A and B (Ge Healthcare) were vortexed until the pellet was dissolved. The suspension was placed on a magnetic rack, and after one minute, the supernatant was removed. The beads were taken off the magnetic rack and suspended in water. This procedure was repeated three times. A total of 10µL of bead A was combined with 10µL of bead B, and the final volume was corrected to 100µL with H2O. To each sample, a total of 5µL of A+B beads were added. To induce the binding of the proteins to the beads, ethanol was added to each sample to a final 50% concentration (v/v). Samples were then incubated for 15 min at room temperature and 800 rpm. After the incubation step, samples were placed again on a magnetic rack, and after one minute, the supernatant was removed. Samples were taken off the magnetic rack and suspended in 80 % ethanol. This procedure was repeated three times. Finally, samples were reconstituted in 100mM TEAB buffer containing trypsin (enzyme/protein ratio of 1:25) and digested overnight on a shaker at 37 °C and 1000 rpm. After digestion, the recovered peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80°C until use. LC-MS/MS Analysis – Nano-flow LC-MS/MS was performed by coupling an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) to a Orbitrap Exploris mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Peptide samples were dissolved in 15 µl loading buffer (0.1% formic acid (FA), 2% ACN in MS-compatible H2O), and 2 µL were injected for each analysis. The samples were loaded onto a pre-column (trap) at higher flowrates (PEPMAP 100 C18 5µm 0.3mmx5mm, Thermo Scientific), using a loading pump and then a valve was switched to delivered to an analytical column (75 µm × 30 cm, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm resin, Dr. Maisch) at a flow rate of 3 µL/min in 98% buffer A (0.1% FA in MS-compatible H2O). After loading, peptides were separated using a 120 min gradient from 2% to 38% of buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN in MS-compatible H2O) at 350 nL/min flow rate. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 was operated in data-independent (DIA) mode, with a m/z range of 350–1400. Full scan spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120 000 resolution after accumulation to the set target value of 300% (100% = 1e6) and maximum injection time of 45ms. The full scans were followed by DIA scans. A total of 47isolation windowns were defined, with a m/z range of 406-986. DIA scan spectra were acquired at 30 000 resolution after accumulation to the set target value of 1000% (100% =1e5) and maximum injection time of 54ms. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 28%.

### Data Protocol
All DIA–MS data files were analyzed with a directDIA workflow using Spectronaut 15.5 (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland). For the Pulsar search, the UniProt human-reviewed canonical reference proteome (20,404 entries, downloaded on December 7th, 2022) and the UniProt mouse-reviewed canonical reference proteome (20,404 entries, downloaded on December 7th, 2022)   . The default settings for database match include: full specificity trypsin digestion, peptide length of between 7 and 52 amino acids and maximum missed cleavage of 2. N-terminal methionine was removed during preprocessing of the protein database. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was used as a fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) were set as 0.01 for the peptide-spectrum match (PSM), peptide and protein identification. Other Spectronaut parameters for identification included maximum intensity as MZ extraction strategy, 0.01 precursor Qvalue Cutoff, 0.2 Precursor PEP Cutoff, stripped sequence as single hit definition. For quantification, identified (Qvalue) was set for precursor filtering, MaxLFQ as protein LFQ method and MS2 quantification with area as quantity type. For further analysis, only those proteins without missing values were considered.  For the analysis of the proteome data the public server at usegalaxy.org was used (Afgan et al, 2016). Analysis was based on the R package limma (Ritchie et al., 2015). Statistical testing of significance was performed using the voom function from Bioconductor (Law et al, 2014). Significance was considered with adjusted p-value < 0.05. Functional annotation of canonical pathways was performed with the use of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Krämer et al., 2014) by QIAGEN. Thresholds were set to an adjusted p-value of 0.05 and a log2 fold change < -0.5 or > 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic liver diseases are worldwide on the rise. Due to the rapidly increasing incidence, in particular in Western countries, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) is gaining importance as the disease can develop into hepatocellular carcinoma. Lipid accumulation in hepatocytes has been identified as the characteristic structural change in MASLD development, but molecular mechanisms responsible for disease progression remained unresolved. Here, we uncover in primary hepatocytes from a preclinical model fed with a Western diet (WD) an increased basal MET phosphorylation and a strong downregulation of the PI3K-AKT pathway. Dynamic pathway modeling of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) signal transduction combined with global proteomics identifies that an elevated basal MET phosphorylation rate is the main driver of altered signaling leading to increased proliferation of WD-hepatocytes. Model-adaptation to patient-derived hepatocytes reveal patient-specific variability in basal MET phosphorylation, which correlates with patient outcome after liver surgery. Thus, dysregulated basal MET phosphorylation could be an indicator for the health status of the liver and thereby inform on the risk of a patient to suffer from liver failure after surgery.

### Keywords
Fatty liver, Liver, Primary hepatocytes

### Affiliations
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Marcel Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Ursula Klingmueller
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)


