### Accession
PXD034176

### Title
Activation of hypothalaActivation of hypothalamic-enhanced adult-born neurons is sufficient to restore cognitive and noncognitive function in Alzheimer's diseasemic-enhanced adult-born neurons is sufficient to restore cognitive and noncognitive function in Alzheimer's diseaseActivation of hypothalamic-enhanced adult-born neurons is sufficient to restore cognitive and noncognitive function in Alzheimer's disease

### Description
Patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) exhibit progressive memory loss, depression, and anxiety, accompanied by impaired adult hippocampal neurogenesis (AHN). Whether modulating AHN is sufficient to improve these cognitive and noncognitive symptoms in AD remains elusive. Here we report that chronic stimulation of hypothalamic supramammillary nucleus (SuM) during early AD restores AHN in an otherwise impaired neurogenic niche. Strikingly, activation of SuM-enhanced adult-born neurons (ABNs) is sufficient to restore memory and emotion deficits in 5×FAD mice. Interestingly, activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs in AD mice increases CA3 and CA1 activity. To probe ABN-activity-dependent changes, we performed quantitative phosphoproteomics and found activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs promotes activation of the canonical pathways related to synaptic plasticity and microglia phagocytosis. Functional assays further confirm increased CA1 long-term potentiation and enhanced microglia phagocytosis of plaques upon activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs. Our findings reveal a robust AHN-promoting strategy that is sufficient to restore AD-associated deficits and highlight ABN-activity-dependent mechanisms underlying functional improvement in AD.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins of mouse hippocampus (3 mice each group) tissue were extracted with buffer of 8 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Proteins in lysate was reduced with dithiothreitol (5 mM final) for 30 min at room temperature and alkylated with iodoacetamide (15 mM final) for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were diluted 4-fold with 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM CaCl2 and digested with trypsin at 1:100 (w/w, trypsin : protein) ratio overnight at room temperature. Peptides were desalted on C18 cartridge (Waters). Peptide concentration was measured with Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermofisher). 1 mg of each peptide sample was used for phosphor-enrichment with High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher) following the manufacture instruction. There were three biological samples for each condition.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed, and peptide identification was performed using the MaxQuant software version 1.6.10.43 (Max Planck Institute, Germany). Protein database searches were performed against the UniProt human protein sequence database (UP000005640). A false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein assignment was set at 1%. Search parameters included up to two missed cleavages at Lys/Arg on the sequence, phosphorylation of tyrosine, serine, and threonine, oxidation of methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered as a static modification. Peptide identifications are reported by filtering of reverse and contaminant entries and assigning to their leading razor protein. Data processing and statistical analysis were performed on Perseus (Version 1.6.0.7). Phospho-peptide quantitation was performed with a p-value of 5% to report statistically significant abundance fold-changes. The canonical pathways were analyzed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (http:www.ingenuity.com).

### Publication Abstract
Patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) exhibit progressive memory loss, depression, and anxiety, accompanied by impaired adult hippocampal neurogenesis (AHN). Whether AHN can be enhanced in impaired AD brain to restore cognitive and affective function remains elusive. Here, we report that patterned optogenetic stimulation of the hypothalamic supramammillary nucleus (SuM) enhances AHN in two distinct AD mouse models, 5&#xd7;FAD and 3&#xd7;Tg-AD. Strikingly, the chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced adult-born neurons (ABNs) rescues memory and emotion deficits in these AD mice. By contrast, SuM stimulation alone or activation of ABNs without SuM modification fails to restore behavioral deficits. Furthermore, quantitative phosphoproteomics analyses reveal activation of the canonical pathways related to synaptic plasticity and microglia phagocytosis of plaques following acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced (vs. control) ABNs. Our study establishes the activity-dependent contribution of SuM-enhanced ABNs in modulating AD-related deficits and informs signaling mechanisms mediated by the activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Phosphoproteom, Mouse, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology University of North Carolina
UNC at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Ling Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Song
Department of Pharmacology University of North Carolina


