### Accession
PXD016228

### Title
Circulating endoglin induces hypertension via the upregulated expression of BMP4

### Description
Endoglin is a membrane glycoprotein primarily expressed by the vascular endothelium and involved in cardiovascular diseases. Upon the proteolytic processing of the membrane-bound protein, a circulating form of endoglin (soluble endoglin, sEng) can be released, and high levels of sEng have been observed in several endothelial-related pathological conditions, where it appears to contribute to endothelial dysfunction. Preeclampsia is a multisystem disorder of high prevalence in pregnant women characterized by the onset of high blood pressure and often associated with increased levels of sEng. Although a pathogenic role for sEng involving hypertension has been reported in several animal models of preeclampsia, the exact molecular mechanisms implicated remain to be identified. To search for sEng-induced mediators, we have analyzed the protein secretome of human endothelial cells in the presence of sEng. We find that sEng induces the expression of BMP4 in endothelial cells, as evidenced by their proteomic signature, gene transcript levels and BMP4 promoter activity. A mouse model of preeclampsia with high sEng plasma levels (sEng+) showed increased levels of BMP4 transcripts in lungs and increased circulating BMP4, compared to those of control animals. In addition, after crossing female wild type with male sEng+ mice, hypertension appears 18 days after mating, precisely coinciding with the appearance of high plasma levels of BMP4. Also, serum levels of sEng and BMP4 are positively correlated in pregnant women with and without preeclampsia. Interestingly, sEng-induced arterial pressure elevation in sEng+ mice was abolished in the presence of the BMP4 inhibitor noggin, suggesting that BMP4 is a downstream mediator of sEng. These results provide a better understanding on the role of sEng in the pathobiology of preeclampsia and other cardiovascular diseases, where sEng levels are increased.

### Sample Protocol
HUVECs were cultured in complete medium (EBM2/EGM2 with 10% FBS and antibiotics) until reaching 80% confluence. Then, cells were washed with PBS and incubated overnight in EBM2 medium with 1% FBS, followed by several washes with PBS to eliminate the remaining serum and albumin, and thus avoid the possible interference in the subsequent peptide analysis. Cells were incubated for an additional 24 hours with serum-free EBM2 medium in the presence or not of 100 ng/mL of recombinant human sEng (Glu26-Gly586; 1097-EN, R&D Systems). After treatment, the medium was collected and proteins were precipitated with acetone overnight at -20ºC. Quantitative proteomic analysis of the samples was carried out using the iTRAQ (Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantification) labeling strategy as described (Casado-Vela et al., 2010; Gallardo-Vara, 2017). Briefly, protein samples (50 μg each) from untreated (samples C1 and C2) and sEng-treated (samples S1 and S2) HUVECs were concentrated by high speed centrifugation for 20 minutes at 4ºC and digested with trypsin at 37ºC overnight with gentle stirring. The resulting peptides of the four samples (C1, S1, C2 and S2) were covalently labeled individually with the 4 isobaric reagents of the commercial kit (# 114, # 115, # 116 and # 117, respectively) (Supplementary Figure 1). The contents of the reaction tubes were pooled, desalted and purified by ion exchange chromatography using Oasis MCX cartridges (Waters) to remove possible impurities. The resulting sample was dried under vacuum using the SpeedVac concentrator, at 30ºC for ~1 hour. Subsequently, tryptic peptides were resuspended in an ampholyte solution (5% glycerol and 1% Ampholine® [Sigma] in water), and fractionated on an OFFGEL equipment (Agilent Technologies) based on their isoelectric point using isoelectric focusing strips of 6 wells (Immobiline Dry Strip, pH 3-10, 13 cm; GE Healthcare). Eluted fractions were desalted using OMIX columns containing a C18 reverse phase resin (Millipore) and dried under vacuum in the SpeedVac. Subsequently, each sample was reconstituted in 5 μL of 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile (ACN) for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. For protein identification and quantification, tryptic peptides were analyzed by Liquid Chromatography and Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The results obtained from the mass spectrometer (MS/MS peaks of each peptide) were analyzed, quantified and identified by comparison with standardized human databases using the search engine of Mascot (version 2.3, Matrix Science) and with the Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.3.0.339; Thermo Scientific). This software allows the calculation of differences in peptide abundance between conditions. All the data obtained were compared with the human Uniprot database (uniprot.org). Of the 1,301 proteins identified in the secretome, 730 were quantified. Then, a list of up-regulated (fold-induction >1.05; Supplementary Table S1) or down-regulated (fold-induction <0.95; Supplementary Table S2) proteins, comparing the secretome of sEng-treated HUVECs versus control samples, were identified. Among the deregulated proteins, an stringent selection was applied by: i) discarding most of the proteins related to the proteasome because they are considered to be common contaminants; ii) imposing a ratio (sEng-treated versus untreated) of ˃1.24 or ˂0.94 as a threshold; iii) including only those proteins whose fold-change followed a similar trend in both replicates; and iv) discarding those proteins that were not identified with a single unique peptide, or showing a variability higher than 50%. In addition, only those proteins with a p-value ≤ 0.005 were considered significantly deregulated.  Statistical analysis Results are shown as mean± SD and differences in mean values were analyzed using Student´s t test. For data obtained from human sera, the Graphpad Prism v.7 was used. Normality of raw data in each group was analyzed using Kolmogorov-Smirnova and Shapiro-Wilk statistical test. Then a non parametric correlation of the data-set was done with Rho-Spearmen and p-values comparing BMP4 and sEng data were obtained. Asterisks indicate statistically significant values between selected conditions (*p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ns not significant).

### Publication Abstract
Endoglin is a membrane glycoprotein primarily expressed by the vascular endothelium and involved in cardiovascular diseases. Upon the proteolytic processing of the membrane-bound protein, a circulating form of endoglin (soluble endoglin, sEng) can be released, and high levels of sEng have been observed in several endothelial-related pathological conditions, where it appears to contribute to endothelial dysfunction. Preeclampsia is a multisystem disorder of high prevalence in pregnant women characterized by the onset of high blood pressure and associated with increased levels of sEng. Although a pathogenic role for sEng involving hypertension has been reported in several animal models of preeclampsia, the exact molecular mechanisms implicated remain to be identified. To search for sEng-induced mediators of hypertension, we analyzed the protein secretome of human endothelial cells in the presence of sEng. We found that sEng induces the expression of BMP4 in endothelial cells, as evidenced by their proteomic signature, gene transcript levels, and BMP4 promoter activity. A mouse model of preeclampsia with high sEng plasma levels (<i>sEng<sup>+</sup></i>) showed increased transcript levels of BMP4 in lungs, stomach, and duodenum, and increased circulating levels of BMP4, compared to those of control animals. In addition, after crossing female wild type with male <i>sEng<sup>+</sup></i> mice, hypertension appeared 18 days after mating, coinciding with the appearance of high plasma levels of BMP4. Also, serum levels of sEng and BMP4 were positively correlated in pregnant women with and without preeclampsia. Interestingly, sEng-induced arterial pressure elevation in <i>sEng<sup>+</sup></i> mice was abolished in the presence of the BMP4 inhibitor noggin, suggesting that BMP4 is a downstream mediator of sEng. These results provide a better understanding on the role of sEng in the physiopathology of preeclampsia and other cardiovascular diseases, where sEng levels are increased.

### Keywords
Hypertension, Bmp4, Endoglin, Hht, Preeclampsia, Tgf-β, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
CIB.CSIC
Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC) and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid 28040, Spain.

### Submitter
Vivian de los Rios

### Lab Head
Dr Carmelo Bernabeu; J. Ignacio Casal
Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC) and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid 28040, Spain.


