### Accession
PXD008554

### Title
Quantitative secretomics during cardiomyogenic differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells

### Description
Cardiovascular diseases are a major cause of life-threatening burden around the world. The heart has a very low regeneration capacity and donor organs for transplantation are scarce. Therefore regeneration of lost myocardium with stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (CMs) provides an attractive strategy for heart repair. Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) can be efficiently differentiated in vitro into CMs but the molecular mechanisms behind this process are still not fully understood. In particular identification of secreted autocrine and/or paracrine factors that function as important extrinsic signals remained elusive because the mass spectrometry (MS)-based identification of secreted proteins from cell culture supernatants is impeded by high levels of albumin present in common differentiation media. Thus we established an albumin-free cardiomyogenic differentiation medium and performed secretomics at seven different time points during in vitro differentiation. This analysis led to the identification of 4832 proteins with 1802 being significantly altered during differentiation and 431 of these were annotated as secreted according to gene ontology. Bioinformatics revealed enrichment of extrinsic Wnt pathway-related proteins 3 days upon induction of differentiation and of extracellular matrix proteins in the resulting CMs. Numerous extrinsic components of Wnt, Activin A, Nodal, TGFβ, BMP or FGF signaling pathways were quantitatively assessed during differentiation. Notably, the abundance of pathway agonists was generally lower compared to the respective antagonists but their curves of progression over timer were rather similar. We hypothesize that Activin A, Nodal and TGFβ signaling are turned down shortly upon initiation of cardiac differentiation whereas BMP signaling is switched on. Wnt and FGF signaling peaks between d0 and d3 of differentiation and interestingly, Activin A and TGFβ signaling seem to be reactivated at the cardiac progenitor stages and/or in early CMs.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry On all days of regular medium exchange according to the cardiomyogenic differentiation protocol by Lian et al. 2012 and 2013, conditioned medium was harvested (except for d1), centrifuged at 2000 x g for 5 min to remove suspended cells and cell debris and frozen at -20°C until further preparation. For each time point of differentiation (d0, d3, d5, d7, d9, d12 and d15) and each experimental condition (hiPSCs or hESCs grown in mTeSR™1 or TeSR™E8™), 9 mL of cell culture supernatant were applied for precipitation applying the TCA-NLS method by Chevallet et al., 2007 and Rabilloud et al., 2013. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 90 µL of a 10% [w/v] N-Lauroylsarcosine (NLS) solution (0.1% f.c.) and 730 µL of 100% [w/v] trichloroacetic acid (10% f.c.) for minimum 3h on ice. Subsequently, proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C. The protein pellet was washed twice with ice-cold tetrahydrofurane (THF) and centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C after each washing step. Upon evaporation of residual THF, proteins were dissolved in sample buffer (30 mM Tris, 2M thiourea, 7M urea, 4% [w/v] CHAPS, pH=8.5) and the protein concentration was determined applying PierceTM 660 nm Protein Assay Reagent. For each sample, a volume of sample buffer containing 55 µg of protein was mixed with an equal volume of 2x Laemmli buffer (35 mM Tris-HCl pH=6.8, 2.8% [w/v] SDS, 7% [v/v] glycerol, and 0.005% [w/v] bromophenol blue). The different samples were applied to SDS-PAGE using 5% stacking and 12% separating gels. Upon overnight (o/n)-staining with Coomassie (Roti-Blue, Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany), sample lanes were cut into pieces of ~1 mm3 and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin according to Shevchenko et al. 2006. Briefly, gel pieces were destained with 25% (v/v) methanol (J.T. Baker, Deventer, Netherlands) and dehydrated with acetontrile (ACN, Merck, NJ). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (AmBic) for 30 min at RT followed by carbamidomethylation of cysteine thiol groups using 100 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM AmBic (all from Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at RT in the dark. Subsequently, gel pieces were dehydrated with ACN, rehydrated once with 100 mM AmBic and dehydrated again. 1 µg of Trypsin Gold (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) were added in 50 mM AmBic and digestion was performed at 37°C o/n. Peptides were extracted in three consecutive steps using first 50% (v/v) ACN and 5% (v/v) formic acid (FA, Sigma-Aldrich), then 75% (v/v) ACN / 0.5% FA and finally pure ACN. Drying of extracts was performed in a Savant DNA 120 Speed Vac Concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were dissolved in 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) in HPLC-grade H2O (HPLC Spectro grade water, Thermo Fisher Scientific). After centrifugation for 5 min at 13000 x g, the supernatants were subjected to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS as decribed by Konze et al., 2014, Konze et al., 2017a and Konze et al., 2017b. A nanoflow ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatography system (RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a trapping column (2 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 3 µM C18 particle size, Acclaim PepMap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a reversed-phase separating column (50 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 2 µm C18 particle size, Acclaim PepMap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for reversed-phase chromatography. Peptides were trapped for 5 min at a flow rate of 6 µL/min with 0.1% TFA. A multistep binary gradient was used for separation: Linear gradient of buffer B (80% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA), in buffer A (0.1 % (v/v) FA) from 4% to 25% in 115 min, 25% to 50% in 25 min, 50% to 90% in 5 min and 90% B for 10 min followed by reconditioning of the column to 4% B in 30 min. The column temperature was set at 45°C and the flow rate was 250 nL/min. The RSLC system was coupled on-line to an LTQ Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer via a Nano Spray Flex Ion Source II (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Metal-coated fused silica emitters (Silica Tip, 20 µm inner diameter, 10 µm tip inner diameter, New Objectives, Woburn, MA) and a voltage of 1.2 kV were applied for electrospray injection. Overview scans were acquired at a resolution of 60 k at m/z 400 in a mass range of m/z 300-1600 in the Orbitrap analyzer and stored in profile mode. Of doubly and triply-charged ions, the ten ions with the highest intensity and a minimum intensity of 2000 counts were selected for CID fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 38, an activation time of 10 ms and an activation Q of 0.250 in the LTQ. Fragment ion mass spectra were recorded in the LTQ at normal scan rate and stored as centroid m/z value and intensity pairs. Ions fragmented once were excluded from further fragmentation for 70 s within a mass window of 10 ppm of the respective m/z value (active exclusion).  Processing of MS Data by Max Quant Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant proteomics software suite version 1.4.1.2 (Cox et al., 2008) for identification and quantification of proteins and the implemented search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) was applied for searching the obtained peak lists against the entries of human proteins in the UniProt database (database downloaded on 09/07/2015) setting the false discovery rate to 1% for proteins and peptides. Deamidation of asparagine and oxidation of methionine were allowed as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modifications. Both, peptides with and without modifications were applied for quantification allowing one missed cleavages of trypsin (cleavage C-terminal of K, R). The mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions was set to 20 ppm or 0.5 kDa, respectively. Proteins were stated as identified if a minimum of two peptides with a length of at least five amino acids were detected applying a false discovery rate of 0.01 on peptide and protein level and enabling the requantification mode. LFQ and iBAQ were set.     Experimental Design and Statistical Rational The secretome during cardiomyogenic differentiation of ES03 and CBiPSC2, pre-cultured in either mTeSRTM1 or TeSRTME8TM was analyzed independently at seven different time points (d0, d3, d5, d7, d9, d12 and d15, supplemental Figure S1A). The four conditions (ES03/mTeSRTM1, ES03/TeSRTME8TM, hCBiPSC2/mTeSRTM1 and hCBiPSC2/TeSRTME8TM) were treated as 4 biological replicates as described below. The program Perseus (Version 1.5.3.1) (38) was used for statistical analysis (ANOVA), scatter plot, Pearson’s correlation, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and hierarchical clustering. Settings for hierarchical clustering were as follows. Distance: Euclidean; Linkage: Average; Process with k-means was set; Number of clusters: 300. The annotations “GOCC slim name” and “KEGG name” were introduced in Perseus by applying the annotations file main-Annot.homo_sapiens.txt.gz.

### Publication Abstract
Human pluripotent stem cells can be differentiated in vitro into cardiomyocytes (CMs) but the molecular mechanisms behind this process are still not fully understood. In particular, the identification of morphogens remained elusive because the mass spectrometry-based identification of secreted proteins from cell culture supernatants is impeded by high levels of albumin present in common differentiation media. An albumin-free cardiomyogenic differentiation medium is established in this study and applied for secretomics at seven different time points during in vitro differentiation. By this analysis 4832 proteins are identified with 1802 being significantly altered during differentiation and 431 of these are annotated as secreted. Numerous extrinsic components of Wnt, TGF&#x3b2;, Activin A, Nodal, BMP, or FGF signaling pathways are quantitatively assessed during differentiation. Notably, the abundance of pathway agonists is generally lower compared to the respective antagonists but their curves of progression over timer were rather similar. It is hypothesized that TGF&#x3b2;, Activin A, and Nodal signaling are turned down shortly upon the initiation of cardiac differentiation whereas BMP signaling is switched on. Wnt and FGF signaling peaks between d0 and d3 of differentiation, and interestingly, Activin A and TGF&#x3b2; signaling seem to be reactivated at the cardiac progenitor stages and/or in early CMs.

### Keywords
Hescs, Secretomics, Lc-ms/ms, Cardiomyogenesis, Hipscs

### Affiliations
Hannover Medical School
Institute of Clinical Biochemistry Hannover Medical school 30625 Hannover, Germany

### Submitter
Falk Büttner

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Fritz Buettner
Institute of Clinical Biochemistry Hannover Medical school 30625 Hannover, Germany


