### Accession
PXD007103

### Title
Endogenous Cell Type-Specific DISC1 Interactomes Reveal Protein Networks Associated to Neurodevelopmental Disorders

### Description
Disrupted in schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) has been implicated in contributing to a number of psychiatric diseases and neurodevelopmental phenotypes such as the proliferation and differentiation of neural progenitor cells. While there has been significant effort directed towards understanding the function of DISC1 through the determination of its protein-protein interactions within an in-vitro setting, endogenous interactions involving DISC1 within a cell-type specific setting relevant to neural development remain unclear.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation - Human neural progenitor cells cultured in geltrex coated 10 cm2 tissue culture dishes with harvested via accutase treatment and lysed in cell lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM NaVO4, 30 mM NaF, 20 mM β-glycerolphosphate, 1% n-Dodecyl-β-Maltopyranoside (Anatrace), supplemented with cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets (Sigma) using mechanical homogenization followed by incubation at 4 degrees Celsius while rotating for 40 minutes. The cell lysate was then centrifuged at 35,000 RPM for 30 min at 4 degrees Celsius and the protein concentration of the supernatant was subsequently determined using the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Per immunoprecipitation, 2 mg of total protein was mixed with 50 ul of Anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads (Sigma) and incubated at 4 degrees Celsius overnight with gentle rotation. Beads were washed 3 times in IP wash buffer (25 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% n-Dodecyl-β-Maltopyranoside) and then incubated with 100 ul of 150 ng/ul 3X-FLAG peptide (Apex Bio) for 2 hours at 4 degrees Celsius.  Mass Spectrometry - Primary elutions from immunoprecipitation experiments were dried down to less than 50 µl in volume using a Thermo Scientific Savant SPD 1010 Speedvac Concentrator. Samples were then combined with LDS sample buffer and 10 mM DTT and incubated at 56 degrees Celsius for 1 hour. Iodoacetamide was added to the samples to a final concentration of 20 mM followed by a 45 minute incubation in the dark at room temperature. Samples were loaded onto 4 – 12% Bis-Tris gels and separated at 135V for 1.5 hours. Following separation, gels were stained using InstantBlue (Expedeon) and then destained in 25% ethanol overnight. The next day, each gel lanes were cut and placed into perforated 96 well plates for destaining and peptide digestion via trypsin at 37 degrees Celsius overnight. Peptides were then extracted with acetonitrile and dried down. A Nano/Capillary LC System Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was used for desalting and reverse-phase separation of peptides. The LC system was coupled to a hybrid linear ion-Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance LTQ-FT (FTICR) 7 Tesla mass spectrometer (LC/MS) for data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis - Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to process MS data which was analyzed using Sequest HT against the Uniprot human database combined with its decoy database. With respect to analysis settings, the mass tolerance was set 10 parts per million for precursor ions and 0.8 daltons for fragment ions, no more than two missed cleavage sites were allowed, static modification was set as cysteine carboxyamidation, and dynamic modification was set as methionine oxidation. False discovery rates (FDRs) were automatically calculated by the perculator node of Proteome Discoverer and a peptide FDR of 0.01 was used for cut-offs. Peptides with high confidence were considered as true hits and proteins interactions were divided into categories as stated in the results: DISC1 interactors that were identified with multiple unique peptides in duplicate assays and zero peptides in control elutions, proteins identified with 1 unique peptide in duplicate and zero peptides in the control, and interactors identified with at least 3 times more peptides, and 5 times more peptide-spectral matches (PSMs) in DISC1-FLAG elutions than in controls.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Disc1, Neural progenitor, Neural

### Affiliations
University of Southern California

### Submitter
Brent Wilkinson

### Lab Head
Dr Marcelo Coba
University of Southern California


