### Accession
PXD017273

### Title
Human and mouse brain, and human cerebrospinal fluid extracellular vesicles LC-MSMS

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are a unified terminology of membrane-enclosed vesicular species ubiquitously secreted by almost every cell type and present in all body fluids. They carry a cargo of lipids, metabolites, nucleic acids and proteins for their clearance from cells as well as for cell-to-cell communications. The exact composition of EVs and their specific functions are not well understood due to the underdevelopment of the separation protocols, especially those from the central nervous system including animal and human brain tissues as well as cerebrospinal fluids. To understand their exact molecular composition and their functional roles, development of the reliable protocols for EV separation is necessary. Known EV separation methods include differential centrifugation-ultracentrifugation, sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation, size exclusion chromatography, ultra-filtration, microfluidics, high-resolution flow cytometric sorting, polymer-based precipitation, immunoaffinity capture, affinity capture, and asymmetric-flow field-flow fractionation. In this report, we describe our EV separation protocols from human biospecimens, such as unfixed frozen brain tissues and cerebrospinal fluids. We also discuss the quality control measures of the above separation protocols by biophysical and proteomic characterizations.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation protocol For separating of brain-derived EVs, the frozen brain tissue was chopped on ice using a razor blade to generate 0.5mm3 sections. The sections were transferred to Hibernate E solution containing Papain in Earle’s Balanced Salt Solution and then incubated in a water bath. After incubation, the samples were immediately place on ice, and ice-cold Hibernate E solution. The dissociated brain tissue samples were homogenized. The homogenized tissue samples were filtered. After differential centrifugation, the supernatant from this final spin was filtered through a 0.22-μm mesh filter and then was centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 70 min at 4°C. For sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation method, after ultracentrifugation, the EV was collected by sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation. The final pellet was resuspended in dfPBS. For qEV method, after ultracentrifugation, the pellet was resuspended in 1000mL of dfPBS. The EV fraction was separated from the pellets using the qEV columns and then eluded with 500μl of dfPBS.  For separating of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-derived EVs, the EV fraction was isolated from CSF samples using the MagCapture Exosome Isolation Kit PS.   Mass spectrometry protocol  For human brain-derived EV sample, the EV lysed in TEAB with 2% SDS and TCEP and reduced for 1h at 55°C, and alkylated with iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The proteins were digested with proteomic grade trypsin in 50mM TEAB overnight at 37°C. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis is conducted by a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with electrospray ionization (ESI) source and coupled with an Ultimate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Dionex). The TMT labelled peptides were separated on a C18 reverse-phase capillary column (pepMap, 75µm x 150 mm, Thermo Fisher) with a linear gradient of 2-35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The top fifteen most abundant ions per scan were selected for MS/MS analysis with a full scan MS ranging 300-1800 m/z) and normalized collision energy (NCE) at 32. For mouse brain-derived EV sample, the EV lysed in 8M urea, reduced with dithiothreitol for 1h at 37°C, and alkylated with iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted to 1M urea and digested with proteomic grade trypsin in 50mM TEAB overnight at 37°C. The digested peptide was desalted using C-18 ziptip, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for nano-liquid chromatography and tandem mass-spectrometry (NanoLC-MS/MS). Analysis was performed on an Easy nanoLC1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 2mg of peptides were loaded onto a C18 pre-column connected to a 50 cm easy spray C18 analytical column (2 mm, 75 mm × 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in positive mode by data dependent acquisition (DDA). The mobile phase was 2% ACN with 0.1% FA (A) and 80% ACN with 0.1% FA (B). The gradient profile was 5% B at 0 min, 30% B at 90 min, 100% B from 99 to 116 min, and 2% B at 117 to 120 min. The column oven was 55°C. The full scan range was 300 to 1650 m/z with and AGC of 3e6 followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The normalized collision energy was 28% and dynamic exclusion was set to 40s. For human CSF-derived EV sample, the EVs were run in a 10% gradient gel until the dye front was 10 mm from the top of the gel. Each lane was then individually removed from the gel and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion after reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodoacetamide. A 2µL injection was loaded by a Waters NanoAcquity Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography in 5% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) at 4.0µL/min for 4min onto a 100µm I.D. fused-silica pre-column packed with 2 cm of 5 µm (200Å) Magic C18AQ (Bruker-Michrom Inc., MA, USA). Peptides were eluted at 300nL/min from a 75 µm I.D. gravity-pulled analytical column packed with 25 cm of 3µm (100Å) Magic C18AQ particles using a linear gradient from 5-35% of mobile phase B (acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) in mobile phase A (water + 0.1% formic acid) over 60mins. Ions were introduced by positive electrospray ionization via liquid junction at 1.4kV into a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive hybrid mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired over m/z 300-1750 at 70,000 resolution (m/z 200) with an AGC target of 1e6, and data-dependent acquisition selected the top 10 most abundant precursor ions for tandem mass spectrometry by HCD fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.6 Da, max fill time of 110ms, and AGC target of 1e5. Peptides were fragmented by a normalized collisional energy of 27, and fragment spectra acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (m/z 200).

### Data Protocol
For human brain-derived EVs, the Raw data files are processed with Proteome Discoverer (Thermo, version 2.1) and searched using Sequest HT against the UniProt Homo sapiens database for protein identification. The false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide and protein levels < 0.01. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues was set as a variable modification. For protein identification, two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise ratio for each TMT channel. For mouse brain-derived EVs, the raw LC-MS/MS data were searched using MaxQuant (v1.6.7) (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) against the Uniprot/Swissprot database for Mus musculus with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). For protein identification, two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For human CSF-derived EVs, the Raw data files were peak processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific, USA) followed by identification using Mascot Server (version 2.5, Matrix Science, UK) against the Homo sapiens (Swiss-Prot) FASTA file (downloaded 10/2018). Search parameters included Trypsin/P specificity, up to 2 missed cleavages, a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine, and variable modifications of oxidized methionine, pyroglutamic acid for Q, and N-terminal acetylation. Assignments were made using a 10ppm mass tolerance for the precursor and 0.05 Da mass tolerance for the fragments. All non-filtered search results were processed by Scaffold (version 4.4.4, Proteome Software, Inc., USA) utilizing the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (Institute for Systems Biology, WA, USA) with threshold values set at 86% for peptides (1.0% false-discovery rate [FDR]) and 90% for proteins (2 peptide minimum, 0.2% FDR), and quantitative comparisons made using the iBAQ-quantitation method with all samples normalized by total ion current for the run.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicle (EV) is a unified terminology of membrane-enclosed vesicular species ubiquitously secreted by almost every cell type and present in all body fluids. They carry a cargo of lipids, metabolites, nucleic acids and proteins for their clearance from cells as well as for cell-to-cell communications. The exact composition of EVs and their specific functions are not well understood due to the underdevelopment of the separation protocols, especially those from the central nervous system including animal and human brain tissues as well as cerebrospinal fluids, and the low yield of proteins in the separated EVs. To understand their exact molecular composition and their functional roles, development of the reliable protocols for EV separation is necessary. Here we report the methods for EV separation from human and mouse unfixed frozen brain tissues by a sucrose step gradient ultracentrifugation method, and from human cerebrospinal fluids by an affinity capture method. The separated EVs were assessed for morphological, biophysical and proteomic properties of separated EVs by nanoparticle tracking analysis, transmission electron microscopy, and labeled and label-free mass spectrometry for protein profiling with step-by-step protocols for each assessment.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Mouse, Extracellular vesicles, Cerebrospinal fluid, Brain tissue, Tmt label

### Affiliations
Boston University School of Medicine
Departments of Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics and Neurology Boston University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Satoshi Muraoka

### Lab Head
Dr Tsuneya Ikezu
Departments of Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics and Neurology Boston University School of Medicine


