### Accession
PXD006526

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Atlas Uncovering the widespread Ubiquitylation regulation in the Embryo of Germinating Rice Seed

### Description
Using high affinity K-Ɛ-GG antibody integrating highly sensitive MS, we investigated the quantitative atlas of ubiquitylome as well as the proteome in the embryos of germinated rice seed. A total of 7507 proteins were identified, and 5018 were precisely quantified, the mass errors and peptides length distribution showed the high mass accuracy, andthe PCA result displayed the well repeatability (Figure S3, Table S2). Of these quantified proteins, 764(65.3%) were found in the ubiquitylome, this high overlapping ascribed to the high resolution of MS.

### Sample Protocol
The rice (Oryza sativa L. japonica cv. Nipponbare) seeds were germinated in a dark condition at 26 °C and 70% relative humidity as previously described (He et al, 2016). The embryos of rice seeds were collected at intervals of 0, 12, 24, 36, and 48 HAI and used for protein extraction. Proteins were extracted with aqueous solution as previously described(He et al., 2016). In brief, embryos of rice seeds were ground in liquid nitrogen and then homogenized in extraction buffer containing 250 mM sucrose, 10 mM EGTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1%(v/v) Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF, PR-619 and 1 mM DTT. The mixture was centrifuged at 15 000g for 15 min at 4 °C, then the supernatant was incubated in ice-cold acetone for more than 2 hat −20 °C and centrifuged at 15 000g for 15 min at 4 °C again. The obtained pellet was washed with cold acetone for three times and then lyophilized for further use.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). The significant changes in the abundance of ubiqutinated peptides between samples were analyzed by t-test (P < 0.05). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the rice annotation project database (http://rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp, released at 8/5/2016) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The precursor ions search range was set as 5 ppm and the fragment ions was 0.02 Da. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification site was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides score was set > 40. The max peptide mass was 4600. The peptide lengths ranged was 8 and 25. Other parameters in MaxQuant were set as default values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteome, Embryo, Lysine ubiquitylation, Rice, Seed germination

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Speciality Agriculture, Wuhan Botanical Garden, Sino-African Joint Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, China
Wuhan Botanic Garden

### Submitter
Dongli He

### Lab Head
Dr Pingfang Yang
Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Speciality Agriculture, Wuhan Botanical Garden, Sino-African Joint Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, China


