### Accession
PXD023439

### Title
The Comprehensive Mouse Retina Proteome

### Description
A comprehensive mouse retina proteome including six development stages (E13.5, E15.5, P0, P6, and P21, mixed sample).

### Sample Protocol
Retina tissues (E13~P21) were fully ground in liquid nitrogen and lysed with lysis buffer L3 (Fitgene Biotech, #FP1801), 0.2% SDS and 1x PMSF (Sangon Biotech, #P0754). Lysates were sonicated on ice and cleared by centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 10 min. The protein extracts were purified by overnight acetone precipitation and re-solubilized using L3, concentration of the samples was determined by Bradford assay. Proteins were reduced using 50 mM TCEP (1 hour at 60 ˚C), alkylated using 55 mM MMTS (45 min at RT in the dark), then the protein sample was loaded on a 10 kDa ultrafiltration tube, washed twice with 8M Urea and three times with 0.25M TEAB. For protein digestion, 50 μl of 0.5M TEAB and trypsin (Promega, enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50) were added to the membrane, reaction was incubated overnight at 37℃. The resulting peptides were first fractionated on a Gemini-NX 3u C18 110Å 150*2.00 mm columns (Phenomenex, #00F-4453-B0) using high-pH reversed-phase chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano) with increasing concentration of acetonitrile, 20 fractions were collected according to the 214 nm absorbance and running time. After vacuum drying, 3 μg of fractionated peptide samples were separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 2μm 100Å 75 μm i.d. x 150mm column (Dionex, #160321) and analyzed using Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™. Full MS spectra from m/z 375-1800 were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (IT) of 40 ms. MS/MS spectra were obtained at a 17,500 resolution with an AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time (IT) of 60 ms, TopN was set to 20 and NCE / stepped NCE was set to 27. In addition, two unfractionated peptide samples were also analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the same parameters as fractionated peptide samples.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (v1.6.15.0) [19029910] against a custom-made database, which combined all mouse sequences from UniProt/Swiss-Prot (MOUSE.2020-08) with sequences derived from translatable lncRNAs and circRNAs, based on the targetdecoy strategy (Reverse) with the standard search parameters with the following exceptions: (1) the peptide-level FDR was set to 5%, and the protein-level FDR was excluded; (2) the minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids; and (3) a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The search included variable modiﬁcations of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q) and ﬁxed modiﬁcation of carbamidomethyl cysteine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Retina

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University
State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Huihui Li

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi Xie
State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China


