### Accession
PXD011049

### Title
Hormonal stimulation of carp is accompanied with changes of seminal plasma and spermatozoa proteome

### Description
Hormonal stimulation in common carp is a routine practice to enhance sperm production and control gamete maturation. The mechanism regulating functional changes of semen composition upon hormone treatment is unknown at present. The aim of the study was to compare proteome of carp spermatozoa and seminal plasma from control (PBS, n=10) and hormonally stimulated males (D-Ala6,Pro9-NEt)-mGnRH+metoclopramide, n=10). Comparative proteomics based on two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis was employed to quantitatively analyze the spermatozoa and seminal plasma proteins changed in abundance due to hormonal stimulation. Changes in phosphorylation and oxidation level of spermatozoa proteins were also analyzed. The proteomic results were validated by western blot, enzymatic assay and mRNA expression analysis.In total we identified 62 spots (38 up and 24 down regulated) corresponding to 48 proteins with differential abundance in spermatozoa and 36 spots (23 up and 13 down regulated) corresponding to 23 proteins differentially abundant in seminal plasma upon hormone treatment (P<0.05; fold change 1.2). The majority of spermatozoa proteins changed in abundance as well as phosphorylation and carbonylation level were involved in cillium assembly and organization, energy metabolism, protein folding, and signal transduction while differentially abundant seminal plasma proteins were associated with immune and stress response, lipid metabolism and tissue remodelling. Our results strongly suggest that hormonal treatment is not only related to hydration of testis but also induces modification of spermatozoa proteins and synthesis of seminal plasma proteins. ROS signaling and cAMP/PKA and calcium/calmodulin pathways are involved in sperm response to hormonal stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from spermatozoa of control and hormonally stimulated males were extracted in DIGE buffer (30 mM Tris, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 4% CHAPS) and sonicated. After centrifugation (10000 g x15 min, at 4ºC) supernatants were precipitated using the 2-D Clean-up Kit (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) and pellets were resuspended in DIGE labeling buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 20 mM Tris, pH 8.5). Spermatozoa of control and hormonally stimulated males and seminal plasma proteins from control and hormnally stimulated males were labeled with 400 pmol (in 1 μL of anhydrous DMF) of CyDye per 50 μg of protein. After labeling, the appropriate samples were combined for each gel. 2-DE was carried out using the IPGPhor isoelectric focusing unit and Ettan Dalt six systems (GE Healthcare). After electrophoresis, gels was scanned using the Typhoon 9400 variable mode imager at the appropriate CyDye excitation wavelengths Cy3 (532 nm), Cy5 (633 nm), Cy2 (488 nm), and at a resolution of 100 um. Scanned images were analyzed using the DeCyder 5.0 software using the Differential In-gel Analysis (DIA) module to detect and normalize the protein spots. Standard was used to normalize gels by calculating the standardized abundance of each spot, i.e. the ratio of either Cy3 or Cy5 signal to that of Cy2. 40 protein spots of spermatozoa and 18 of supernatan after cryopreservation revealing significant quantitative (at least 1.1-fold change) differences were excised from the gels and sent to protein identification by in-gel digestion with modified porcine trypsin protease (Promega, Fitchburg, WI). The digested tryptic peptides were desalted using a Zip-tip C18 (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Peptides were eluted from the Zip-tip with 0.5 uL of matrix solution (alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid, 5 mg/mL in 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 25mM ammonium bicarbonate), spotted on a MALDI plate and identified with MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Spots were identified by MS and MS/MS using a MALDI-TOF/TOF autoflex speed TOF/TOF mass spectrometer equipped with a smartbeam II laser (355 nm; Bruker Daltonics). MALDI-TOF mass spectra were acquired in reflectron positive ion mode. TOF/TOF MS fragmentation spectra were acquired for each sample, averaging 4000 laser shots per fragmentation spectrum on each of the 3-10 most abundant ions present in each sample (excluding trypsin autolytic peptides and other known background ions). Operating conditions were as follows: ion source 1 = 19.00 kV, ion source 2 = 16.75 kV, lens voltage = 7.50 kV, reflector voltage = 21.00 kV, optimized pulsed ion extraction time = 120 ns, matrix suppression = 500 Da, and positive reflectron mode. The strongest precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis. Peak lists were generated from MS spectra with flexAnalysis version 3.3 (Bruker Daltonics). Database search: both the resulting peptide mass and the associated fragmentation spectra were submitted to BioTools equipped with MASCOT search engine (version 2.4) to search the NCBInr database on 2017.11.9 and created bonnyfishes database. The database search criteria were as follows: enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C); and variable modifications, oxidation (M) peptide mass tolerance of 200 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.7 Da, and 1 missed cleavage allowed.The search results were filtered with a significant threshold of p<0.05 and a Mascot ion score cutoff of ≥30 for at least two peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hormone, Spermiation, Sperm maturation, Semen, Fish, Proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences
Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Mariola  Dietrich

### Lab Head
Dr Mariola Dietrich
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences


