### Accession
PXD021825

### Title
Site-specific N-linked glycosylation of recombinant SARS-CoV-1 and -2 Receptor Binding Domain from GnTI-/- cells

### Description
Fusion proteins of the SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor binding domain with a fluorescent protein were created in monomeric and trimeric form as tools for receptor binding studies in cultured cells and animal tissues. Here, site specific N-linked glycosylation in the proteins expressed from GnTI-/- cells is profiled with LC-MS/MS, using electron transfer high-energy collision dissociation

### Sample Protocol
Seven μg of endoH (NEB, New England BioLabs) treated and untreated SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 RBD domains (monomeric and trimeric) were digested following the S-trapTM Micro spin column protocol (Protifi). Briefly, samples were mixed in the ratio 1:1 (v/v) with 10% SDS, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.55. Next, samples were reduced with 20 mM DTT (final concentration) at 55°C for 15 minutes, followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide (final concentration) for 30 minutes in the dark. Then, samples were acidified with 12% phosphoric acid at the ratio 10:1 (v/v) respectively and mixed with the S-trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1) in the ratio 1:6 (v/v) respectively. The resulting sample mixture was added to the S-trap spin column and centrifuged at 4000 × g for  2 min at room temperature. The captured proteins were washed six times with S-trap binding buffer. Following washing, 25 µL of GluC protease (Sigma Aldrich) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (1:30 w/w ratio) were added to the S-trap column and incubated at 37 °C for 3 hours. Next, 25 µL of trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (1:30 w/w ratio) were applied to the same S-trap column and incubated for 2 hours at 37 °C. After that, 150 µL of ammonium bicarbonate were added to the S-trap and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Finally, the peptides were eluted from the S-trap in 3 steps by centrifugation at 4000 × g for 2 min: first elution of ammonium bicarbonate-peptide mixture, followed by elution with 40 µL of 0.2% formic acid and, lastly, with 40 µL of 50% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v). All elutions we pooled, vacuum-dried and resuspended in 85 µL of 2% formic acid.  Five μl of resuspended peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen) mass spectrometer coupled to nanospray UHPLC system Ultimate3000 (ThermoFisher) in duplicates. A 90-min LC gradient from 0% to 35% acetonitrile was used to separate peptides at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A Poroshell 120 EC C18 (50 cm × 75 µm, 2.7 µm, Agilent Technologies) analytical column and an AcclaimTM PepmapTM 100 C18 (5 mm × 0.3 mm, 5 µm, ThermoFisher Scientific) trap column were used for the peptide separation. The data were acquired in data-dependent mode. Orbitrap Fusion parameters for the full scan MS spectra were as follows: an AGC target of 4 × 105 at 60,000 resolution, scan range 350–2000 m/z, Orbitrap maximum injection time 50 ms. Ten most intense ions (2+ to 8+ ions) were subjected to fragmentation with higher energy collision dissociation set to 30%. Once oxonium ions corresponding to the glycan fragmentation were detected in MS2 spectra, the same precursor ions were subjected to electron-transfer/higher energy collision dissociation ion fragmentation scheme. The supplemental higher energy collision dissociation energy was set at 27%. The MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 5∗105, maximum injection time 250 ms, scan range 120–4000 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 16 s

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were searched for glycan modifications with ByonicTM against a custom database of recombinant RBD domains of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 and proteases. The search window was set to 12/24 ppm for MS1/MS2, respectively, and a False Discovery Rate (FDR) to 1%. Up to five missed cleavages were allowed using C-terminal cleavage at R/K/E/D to account for the sequential GluC-trypsin digestion. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable common 1, glycan modifications as variable common 2, permitting up to max. 2 variable common modifications per one peptide. A glycan database containing 305 N-linked glycans was used in the search. Glycopeptide hits reported in the Byonic results file were initially accepted if the Byonic score was ≥200, LogProb ≥2, and peptide length was at least 6 amino acids. Accepted glycopeptides were manually inspected for quality of fragment assignments. The glycopeptide was considered true-positive if the appropriate b, y, c and z fragment ions were matched in the spectrum, as well as the corresponding oxonium ions of the identified glycans. All glycopeptide identifications were merged into a single non-redundant list per sequon. Glycans were classified based on HexNAc content as chitobiose (up to maximum 2 HexNAc and 1 Fuc), high-mannose (2 HexNAc), hybrid (3 HexNAc) or complex (>3 HexNAc). Byonic search results were exported to mzIdentML format. These files were used to build a spectral library in Skyline and extract peak areas for individual glycoforms from MS1 scans. The full database of variable N-linked glycan modifications from Byonic was manually added to the Skyline project file in XML format. Glycopeptide identifications from Byonic were manually inspected in Skyline and evaluated for correct isotope assignments and well-defined elution profiles, acceptable for peak integration.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Rbd, Covid19, Ethcd, N-linked glycosylation

### Affiliations
Utrecht University
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Department of Chemistry, Utrecht University

### Submitter
Joost Snijder

### Lab Head
Dr Joost Snijder
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Department of Chemistry, Utrecht University


