### Accession
PXD011108

### Title
ATM orchestrates the DNA-damage response to counter toxic non-homologous end-joining at broken replication forks

### Description
Mutations in the ATM tumor suppressor gene confer cellular hypersensitivity to various DNA-damaging chemotherapeutic agents. To explore genetic resistance mechanisms towards such drugs, we performed genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 loss-of-function screens in cells treated with the DNA topoisomerase I poison topotecan. Our ensuing characterizations of hits established that loss of terminal components of the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) machinery or components of the BRCA1-A complex specifically confer topotecan resistance to ATM-deficient cells. Our findings indicate that hypersensitivity of ATM-mutant cells to topotecan or the poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor olaparib is due to delayed engagement of homologous recombination repair (HRR) at a subset of DNA-replication-fork associated single ended double-strand breaks (seDSBs), which allows non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) mediated repair, resulting in toxic chromosome fusions. Thus, restoration of legitimate repair in ATM-deficient cells – either by preventing the DNA ligation step of NHEJ or by enhancing HRR engagement by deregulating the BRCA1-A complex – markedly suppresses this toxicity. We conclude that the crucial role for ATM at seDSBs is to prevent toxic LIG4-mediated NHEJ at damaged replication forks. Furthermore, our observation that suppressor mutations in ATM-mutant backgrounds are fundamentally different to those that operate in BRCA1-mutant scenarios suggests new opportunities for patient stratification in the clinic, as well as additional therapeutic vulnerabilities that might be exploited in drug-resistant cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in SILAC media containing either L-arginine and L-lysine, L-arginine [13C6] and L-Lysine [2H4], or L-arginine [13C615N4] and L-lysine [13C6-15N2] (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Cells were pretreated with 10 µM ATM inhibitor KU-55933 (Selleckchem) for 1 h prior to treatment with 5 µM camptothecin (Sigma) for 2 h. Subsequently, cell were lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5,650 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with protease inhibitors and phosphatase (Sigma). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation, proteins were precipitated in fourfold excess of ice-cold acetone and subsequently re-dissolved in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Sigma) and peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). For the enrichment of phosphorylated peptides, 5 mg of peptides in binding buffer (50% acetonitrile, 6% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O) were incubated with 10 mg of TiO2 spheres (GL Sciences) for 1 h. The beads were washed twice in binding buffer and subsequently peptides were eluted using elution buffer (10% NH4OH, 25% acetonitrile in H2O). Peptides were fractionated using micro-column-based strong-cation exchange chromatography and desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips. Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 1.9 µm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2 h. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap. The ten most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 92,578 human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in December 2016 using Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm as described previously. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability to arrive at a false discovery rate below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the ATM tumor suppressor gene confer hypersensitivity to DNA-damaging chemotherapeutic agents. To explore genetic resistance mechanisms, we performed genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screens in cells treated with the DNA topoisomerase I inhibitor topotecan. Thus, we here establish that inactivating terminal components of the non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) machinery or of the BRCA1-A complex specifically confer topotecan resistance to ATM-deficient cells. We show that hypersensitivity of ATM-mutant cells to topotecan or the poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor olaparib reflects delayed engagement of homologous recombination at DNA-replication-fork associated single-ended double-strand breaks (DSBs), allowing some to be subject to toxic NHEJ. Preventing DSB ligation by NHEJ, or enhancing homologous recombination by BRCA1-A complex disruption, suppresses this toxicity, highlighting a crucial role for ATM in preventing toxic LIG4-mediated chromosome fusions. Notably, suppressor mutations in ATM-mutant backgrounds are different to those in BRCA1-mutant scenarios, suggesting new opportunities for patient stratification and additional therapeutic vulnerabilities for clinical exploitation.

### Keywords
Atm, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


