### Accession
PXD017681

### Title
Molecular markers in the CSF proteome differentiate neuroinflammatory diseases

### Description
Manuscript "Molecular markers in the CSF proteome differentiate neuroinflammatory diseases" by Maria L. Elkjaer Arkadiusz Nawrocki, Tim Kacprowski, Anja Hviid Simonsen, Romain Marignier, Tobias Sejbaek, Helle H. Nielsen, Lene Wermuth, Peter Høgh, Finn Sellebjerg, Richard Reynolds, Jan Baumbach, Martin R. Larssen, Zsolt Illes (prepared for submission). Validation of differences in protein abundance, found in the discovery phase of the project (comparison of pools of respective samples), by analysis of proteomes of individual samples enrolled.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion of CSF proteins; TMT 11plex (ThermoFischer Scientific) labelling; fractionation by HILIC; Reverse phase LC separation and analysis by Q-Exactive MS (ThermoFischer Scientific) (please see manual for details).

### Data Protocol
Raw data processed and proteins identified by Proteome Discoverer v. 2.3 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Data processing, please see manual for details.

### Publication Abstract
To identify markers in the CSF of multiple sclerosis (MS) subtypes, we used a two-step proteomic approach: (i) Discovery proteomics compared 169 pooled CSF from MS subtypes and inflammatory/degenerative CNS diseases (NMO spectrum and Alzheimer disease) and healthy controls. (ii) Next, 299 proteins selected by comprehensive statistics were quantified in 170 individual CSF samples. (iii) Genes of the identified proteins were also screened among transcripts in 73 MS brain lesions compared to 25 control brains. F-test based feature selection resulted in 8 proteins differentiating the MS subtypes, and secondary progressive (SP)MS was the most different also from controls. Genes of 7 out these 8 proteins were present in MS brain lesions: GOLM was significantly differentially expressed in active, chronic active, inactive and remyelinating lesions, FRZB in active and chronic active lesions, and SELENBP1 in inactive lesions. Volcano maps of normalized proteins in the different disease groups also indicated the highest amount of altered proteins in SPMS. Apolipoprotein C-I, apolipoprotein A-II, augurin, receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase gamma, and trypsin-1 were upregulated in the CSF of MS subtypes compared to controls. This CSF profile and associated brain lesion spectrum highlight non-inflammatory mechanisms in differentiating CNS diseases and MS subtypes and the uniqueness of SPMS.

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis, Human csf, Proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark, Odense
Martin R. Larsen's Group, PR Group, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark

### Submitter
Arkadiusz Nawrocki

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Røssel Larsen
Martin R. Larsen's Group, PR Group, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark


