### Accession
PXD001135

### Title
Relative protein quantification in mouse hippocampal synaptosomes during aging series

### Description
Age-related cognitive decline is a serious health concern in our aging society. Decreased cognitive function observed during healthy brain aging is most likely caused by changes in brain connectivity and synaptic dysfunction in particular brain regions. Here we show that aged C57BL/6J wildtype mice have hippocampus-dependent spatial memory impairments. To identify the molecular mechanisms that are relevant to these memory deficits we investigated the temporal profile of mouse hippocampal synaptic proteome changes at 20, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 and 100 weeks of age. Extracellular matrix proteins were the only group of proteins that showed a robust and progressive upregulation over time. This was confirmed by immunoblotting and histochemical analysis, indicating that the increased levels of hippocampal extracellular matrix may limit synaptic plasticity as a potential cause of age-related cognitive decline. In addition, we observed that stochasticity in synaptic protein expression increased with age, in particular for proteins that were previously linked with various neurodegenerative diseases, whereas low variance in expression was observed for proteins that play a basal role in neuronal function and synaptic neurotransmission. Together, our findings show that both specific changes and increased variance in synaptic protein expression are associated with aging and may underlie reduced synaptic plasticity and impaired cognitive performance at old age.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosome isolation and sample preparation. Animals were sacrificed by cervical dislocation and hippocampi were dissected, frozen, and stored at -80 °C until protein isolation. Synaptosomes were isolated from hippocampi at eight different ages, 20, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 and 100 weeks, as described previously (16, 17). In brief, hippocampi were homogenized in ice-cold 0.32 M sucrose buffer with 5 mM HEPES at pH 7.4 and protease inhibitor (Roche) and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C to remove debris. Supernatant was loaded on top of a discontinuous sucrose gradient consisting of 0.85 M and 1.2 M sucrose. After ultracentrifugation at 110,000 x g for 2 h at 4 °C, the synaptosome fraction was collected at the interface of 0.85 M and 1.2 M sucrose, resuspended and pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 80,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C. Pellets were redissolved in 5 mM HEPES and protein concentrations were determined using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). For each sample, 50 μg of protein was transferred to a fresh tube and dried in a SpeedVac overnight.  Protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling. Per sample, 50 μg synaptosome proteins were dissolved in 0.85% RapiGest (Waters Associates, Milford, MA, USA), alkylated with methyl methanethiosulfonate, and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) as described (16, 17). In each iTRAQ experiment samples were labeled respectively with iTRAQ reagents 113 = 20 weeks, 114 = 40 weeks, 115 = 50 weeks, 116 = 60 weeks, 117 = 70 weeks, 118 = 80 weeks, 119 = 90 weeks, and 121 = 100 weeks. To accommodate eight independent protein samples for each time point, a total of eight 8-plex iTRAQ experiments was performed (8x8).   Two-dimensional liquid chromatography (2DLC). The lyophilized iTRAQ labeled samples were separated in the first dimension by strong cation exchange column (2.1x150 mm polysulfoethyl A column, PolyLC), and the in second dimension on an analytical capillary reverse phase C18 column (150 mm x 100 m i.d. column) at 400 nL/min using the LC-Packing Ultimate system. The peptides were separated using a linear increase in concentration of acetonitrile from 4 to 28% in 75 minutes, to 36% in 7 minutes and finally to 72% in 2 minutes. The eluent was mixed with matrix (7 mg of re‑crystallized ‑cyano-hydroxycinnaminic acid in 1 mL 50% acetronitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 10 mM ammonium dicitrate) and delivered at a flow rate of 1.5 L/min and deposited onto an Applied Biosystems matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization plated by means of a robot (Probot, Dionex) once every 15 s for a total of 384 spots.   MALDI-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed on an ABI 5800 proteomics analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Forster City, CA). Peptide collision-induced dissociation was performed at 2 kV, the collision gas was air. MS/MS spectra were collected from 2000 laser shots. Peptides with signal-to-noise ratios over 50 at the MS mode were selected for MS/MS analysis, at a maximum of 30 MS/MS per spot. The precursor mass window was set to a relative resolution of 200. Peaklists were extracted from the instrument database using TS2Mascot software (MatrixScience).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification. Protein identification and quantification are described in detail in (18). To annotate spectra, Mascot (MatrixScience, version 2.3.01) searches were performed against Mus musculus sequences in the Swissprot database (20/10/2010; 16,326 sequences searched) and in the larger but more redundant NCBI database (20/10/2010; 147,581 sequences searched). MS/MS spectra were searched with trypsin specificity and fixed iTRAQ modifications on lysine residues and N-termini of the peptides and methylthio modifications on cysteine residues. Oxidation on methionine residues was allowed as a variable modification. Mass tolerance was 150 ppm for precursor ions and 0.4 Da for fragment ions, while allowing a single site of miscleavage. For each spectrum the best scoring peptide sequence and protein accession were selected. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides identification was calculated using a decoy database search (provided by the Mascot software) and the peptide list was limited to 5% false positives in order to improve protein identification confidence. Protein redundancy in the result files was removed by clustering the precursor protein sequences at a threshold of 90% sequence similarity over 85% of the sequence length. If present, a random Swissprot protein entry was chosen as representative for a protein cluster, if not, a random NCBInr sequence was chosen. Subsequently all peptides were matched against the protein clusters and only those peptides were included that mapped unique to one protein. Proteins were considered for quantification if at least three peptides were identified in four replicate iTRAQ sets and at least one peptide in the four other sets.  Protein quantification and identification of differentially expressed proteins. iTRAQ areas (m/z 113-121) were extracted from raw spectra and corrected for isotopic overlap. Peptides with iTRAQ signature peaks of less than 1,500 were not considered for quantification. To compensate for the possible variations in the starting amounts of the samples, the individual peak areas of each iTRAQ signature peak were log transformed to yield a normal distribution, and normalized to the mean peak area of every sample. No measures were taken to correct for iTRAQ compression. Next, iTRAQ reporter ions were standardized within each spectrum by subtracting the average intensities of all reporter ions in that spectrum. Protein abundances in every experiment were determined by taking the average normalized standardized iTRAQ peak area of all unique peptides annotated to a protein. To determine which proteins show significant differential expression, three types of statistical analysis were performed. First, the Two-Class Analysis option implemented in the Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) package (19) was used to determine significant regulation at individual time points. Two-class SAM analysis was used both as an unpaired analysis, and as a paired analysis in which samples within iTRAQ sets were considered as paired with the 20 weeks time point as the base line. Paired analysis was performed to reduce false positives resulting from technical variation between iTRAQ sets, and resulted in more stringent selection of differentially regulated proteins than unpaired analysis. In addition, the One-Class Time Course Analysis option in SAM was used to determine significant regulation over time. In all SAM analyses a threshold q-value of 10% was used to determine significant differential protein expression. The Time Course Analysis was used to determine the set of proteins for which there was strongest evidence for regulation over time. K-means clustering and Pearson correlation analysis were used to further analyze this set of proteins. The intersection of the paired and the unpaired Two-Class Analysis was used to determine the set of proteins for which there was evidence for regulation at one or more time points.

### Publication Abstract
Age-related cognitive decline is a serious health concern in our aging society. Decreased cognitive function observed during healthy brain aging is most likely caused by changes in brain connectivity and synaptic dysfunction in particular brain regions. Here we show that aged C57BL/6J wild-type mice have hippocampus-dependent spatial memory impairments. To identify the molecular mechanisms that are relevant to these memory deficits, we investigated the temporal profile of mouse hippocampal synaptic proteome changes at 20, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, and 100 weeks of age. Extracellular matrix proteins were the only group of proteins that showed robust and progressive up-regulation over time. This was confirmed by immunoblotting and histochemical analysis, which indicated that the increased levels of hippocampal extracellular matrix might limit synaptic plasticity as a potential cause of age-related cognitive decline. In addition, we observed that stochasticity in synaptic protein expression increased with age, in particular for proteins that were previously linked with various neurodegenerative diseases, whereas low variance in expression was observed for proteins that play a basal role in neuronal function and synaptic neurotransmission. Together, our findings show that both specific changes and increased variance in synaptic protein expression are associated with aging and may underlie reduced synaptic plasticity and impaired cognitive performance in old age.

### Keywords
Synaptosome, Mouse, Natural aging, Itraq, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology
Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, VU Amsterdam De Boelelaan 1085 1081 HV Amsterdam

### Submitter
Pim van Nierop

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ronald van Kesteren
Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, VU Amsterdam De Boelelaan 1085 1081 HV Amsterdam


