### Accession
PXD030496

### Title
Proteomics evidences of a systemic response to desiccation in the resurrection plant Haberlea rhodopensis.

### Description
According to the systems biology approach, genomics tells what can happen, transcriptomics what appears to be happening, metabolomics what has happened and proteomics what makes it happen. Thereby, to get a better what makes resurrection plants extremely tolerant to drought, we explored changes in the resurrection proteome and cellular ultrastructure of Haberlea rhodopensis in response to desiccation. Because genomic and proteomic data concerning resurrection plants are limited, particularly for H. rhodopensis, we identified proteins based on previous transcriptomic studies. For the identified proteins, fold changes and differences in transcript levels between fresh and dry plants were analyzed; proteins significantly enriched in various biological processes and metabolic pathways were detected using metabolomic metadata. The results confirmed that the transcription of different genes is regulated as previously described at the proteomic level; new genes were identified in desiccation tolerance, posttranscriptional regulation events, and posttranslational regulation events. We revealed new evidences about organelle and cell preservation, posttranscriptional and posttranslational regulation, photosynthesis, primary metabolism, and phagocytosis in H. rhodopensis. These findings can inform further genomic and evolutionary studies, as well as targeted genetic engineering to improve drought tolerance in crops as a response to climate change.

### Sample Protocol
Total leaf proteins from fresh and dry plants were extracted using phenol/sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) extraction essentially according to Wang et al. with three washing steps of protein pellets with 0.3 M Guanidine hydrochloride in ethanol and one with absolute ethanol. Total protein extracts from fresh and dry plants in triplicates were analysed by liquid chromatography coupled to a mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS). For each sample, 45 µg of total proteins were loaded on SDS-PAGE till reaching the separation gel. Stacked protein bands were excised, and proteins were reduced, alkylated then destained prior to digestion with trypsin enzyme (sequencing mass grade, Promega,). The extracted peptides were analysed with an Ekspert nanoLC™ 425 system (Eksigent, SCIEX) coupled to a TripleTOF® 6600 MS (Sciex) as recently described in Xu et al (2021).

### Data Protocol
The peptide identification was carried out by searching in homemade Haberlea RNA-seq contigs database (1605312 seq) + Boea RNA-seq contigs (68670 seq) (Liu et al., Gechev et al. Boea…) and UniProt Viridiplantae database released in March 2019 (7072838 sequences) as recently described in Xu et al (2021) via Mascot Daemon interface (v 2.6.0. Matrix Science) using the following parameters: fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, two missed cleavages, carbamido-methylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation, tryptophan to kynurenin, pyroglutamate from N-terminal glutamate and phosphorylation of serine/threonine as variable modifications.  Only the proteins identified with a significance Mascot-calculated confidence of 95% were kept for further analysis. The proteins identified with a fold change > 1.5, a p-value < 0.05 and minimum two significant sequences per protein and one unique sequence per protein were considered as differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Global warming and drought stress are expected to have a negative impact on agricultural productivity. Desiccation-tolerant species, which are able to tolerate the almost complete desiccation of their vegetative tissues, are appropriate models to study extreme drought tolerance and identify novel approaches to improve the resistance of crops to drought stress. In the present study, to better understand what makes resurrection plants extremely tolerant to drought, we performed transmission electron microscopy and integrative large-scale proteomics, including organellar and phosphorylation proteomics, and combined these investigations with previously published transcriptomic and metabolomics data from the resurrection plant <i>Haberlea rhodopensis</i>. The results revealed new evidence about organelle and cell preservation, posttranscriptional and posttranslational regulation, photosynthesis, primary metabolism, autophagy, and cell death in response to desiccation in <i>H. rhodopensis.</i> Different protective intrinsically disordered proteins, such as late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) proteins, thaumatin-like proteins (TLPs), and heat shock proteins (HSPs), were detected. We also found a constitutively abundant dehydrin in <i>H. rhodopensis</i> whose phosphorylation levels increased under stress in the chloroplast fraction. This integrative multi-omics analysis revealed a systemic response to desiccation in <i>H. rhodopensis</i> and certain targets for further genomic and evolutionary studies on DT mechanisms and genetic engineering towards the improvement of drought tolerance in crops.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Haberlea, Dessication, Resurrection plants;, Transcriptomics; proteomics

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform
LIST_ERIN_BEAP platform Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Céline LECLERCQ
LIST_ERIN_BEAP platform Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG


