### Accession
PXD033662

### Title
Chloroplast crotonylome analysis of wheat seedling leaves under salt stress

### Description
An TMT-based quantitative crotonylome analysis was performed on the crotonylated proteins enriched from the chloroplast extracts of the normal and salt-treated wheat seedling leaves by using affinity purification and LC-MS/MS. The crotonylated peptides from wheat chloroplast extracts were enriched by using anti-crotonyllysine mouse mAb (Clone 4D5) antibody (PTM BioLabs, HangZhou, China PTM-501 and Nano LC-MS/MS was performed by using a Dionex rapid-separation liquid chromatography system interfaced with a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Sample Protocol
Chloroplast proteome was extracted according to the BPP methods with some modifications. In brief, the intact chloroplast pellets were suspended in 2.5 mL of extraction buffer [30 % sucrose, 1 % Triton X-100, 5 mM trichostatin A, 50 mM nicotinamide, 2 % β-mercaptoethanol, 100 mM Tris, 100 mM EDTA, 50 mM borax, 50 mM L-ascorbic acid, 1% protease inhibitor (Protease Inhibitor Cocktail VI, Merck Millipore, USA)] and violently oscillated at RT. After 20 min, an equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added to the mixture and future oscillated for 15 min. After a centrifugation of 15,000 g for 30 min, the upper phenol phase was transferred into a new centrifuge tube and fully mixed with five volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate. After standing overnight at −20 °C, the protein pellets were collected by a centrifugation of 15,000 g for 20 min and orderly washed once with pre-cooling methyl alcohol (20 mM β-mercaptoethanol) and three times with pre-cooling acetone (20 mM β-mercaptoethanol). After freeze drying, the protein samples were stored at −80 °C for following crotonylome analysis.   The protein samples were dialyzed against 2 M urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 2 h twice. Trypsin was added to the samples at trypsin/ sample ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The digested peptides were further filtered with Amicon ultra centrifugal filters (10 kD MWKO, Merck Millipore) and were dried under vacuum to remove residual primary amine from reagents. Then, each sample was labeled with TMT10plex according manufacturer’s instructions and combined after labeling and dried under vacuum. Subsequently, the peptides subjected to TMT labeling were further fractioned by high pH reversed-phase HPLC using Gilson 300 series. Briefly, 300 ug of labeled samples were solubilized in 200 μl of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10), and injected into an Xbridge column (Waters, C18, 3.5 μm, 2.1 × 150 mm) using a linear gradient from 2 % to 45% acetonitrile in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) over 70 min. The peptides were then combined into eight fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Mixture of TMT labeled samples (1mg of each sample) was desalted by Sep-Pak tC18 (Varian, CA). Kcr peptides were enriched by using anti-crotonyllysine mouse mAb (Clone 4D5) antibody (PTM BioLabs, HangZhou, China PTM-501) following manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were desalted on Empore 3M C18 (2215) StageTip2 prior to nano LC-MS/MS analysis.  Nano LC-MS/MS was performed by using a Dionex rapid-separation liquid chromatography system interfaced with a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a self-packed 100 μm × 2 cm trap packed with Magic C18AQ (5 μm, 200 A, Michrom Bioresources, Aubum, CA), and washed with buffer A (0.2 % formic acid) for 5 min at a flow rate of 10 μL min−1. The trap was brought in line with the homemade analytical column (Magic C18AQ, 3 μm, 200 A, 75 μm × 50 cm), and peptides were fractionated at 300 nL min−1 with a multistep gradient of 4% - 15 % buffer B (0.16% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile) over 20 min, then 15 %- 25 % buffer B during 40 min, followed by 25 % - 50 % B for 30 min. Mass spectrometry data were acquired using a data-dependent acquisition procedure with a cyclic series of a full scan acquired with a resolution of 120,000, followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) scans (30 % of relative collision energy in the HCD cell) with resolution of 30, 000 of the 20 most intense ions. The main parameters were set as follow: repeat count= 1, dynamic exclusion duration= 30 s, resolution for Orbitrap scanning= 15, 000, low mass = 110 amu.

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed with the MaxQuant proteomics data analysis workflow (version 1.6.2.6) with the Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann. 2008; Cox et al., 2011). MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot Triticum aestivum (taxonomy identifier: 4565 130, 673 entries) combined with 262 common contaminants. The type of LC-MS run was set to “Reporter ion MS2” with“TMT-6-plex” as isobaric labels. Reporter ion mass tolerance was set to 0.003 Da. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for protein, peptide spectrum match, and site decoy fraction levels. Peptides were required to have a minimum length of seven amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. MaxQuant was used to score fragmentation scans for identification based on a search with an allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 7 ppm. The allowed fragment mass deviation was 20 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set trypsin/P that allowed two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and crotonylation at lysine, N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation at Methionine were set as variable modifications.  The protein group results and Kcr sites were analyzed using Perseus (version 1.6.1.3). The intensity of each channel was 1st normalized based on protein group data (sum of total reporter ion intensity). The data then filtered for reverse and contaminant hits and the reporter ion intensity data were further log 2 transformed. Only sites that has site localization confidence> 75% were included in the analysis. The reporter ion intensity were then normalized by protein reporter ion intensity. For Kcr sites quantification, the ratios of the TMT reporter ion intensities in MS/MS spectra from raw data sets were used to calculate fold changes in the T and CK samples. In order to remove the false positive events of the modifications caused by changes in protein levels, the proteome was quantitatively normalized, and which means that the ratio of Kcr sites divided by ratio of corresponding protein in the control and treatment samples. The ratio at three repeats of control and salt treatments were quantified, and then the Kcr peptides with P-value＜0.05 were defined as significantly regulated Kcr peptides

### Publication Abstract
Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is a novel post-translational modification and its function in plant salt-stress responses remains unclear. In this study, we performed the first comprehensive chloroplast crotonylome analysis of wheat seedling leaves to examine the potential functions of Kcr proteins in salt-stress responses. In a total of 471 chloroplast proteins, 1290 Kcr sites were identified as significantly regulated by salt stress, and the Kcr proteins were mainly involved in photosynthesis, protein folding, and ATP synthesis. The identified Kcr sites that responded to salt stress were concentrated within KcrK and KcrF motifs, with the conserved KcrF motif being identified in the Kcr proteins of wheat chloroplasts for the first time. Notably, 10 Kcr sites were identified in fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase (TaFBA6), a key chloroplast metabolic enzyme involved in the Calvin-Benson cycle. Site-directed mutagenesis of TaFBA6 showed that the Kcr at K367 is critical in maintaining its enzymatic activity and in conferring salt tolerance in yeast. Further molecular dynamic simulations and analyses of surface electrostatic potential indicated that the Kcr at K367 could improve the structural stability of TaFBA6 by decreasing the distribution of positive charges on the protein surface to resist alkaline environments, thereby promoting both the activity of TaFBA6 and salt tolerance.

### Keywords
Salt stress, Wheat chloroplast, Crotonylome

### Affiliations
Capital normal university
College of Life Science, Capital Normal University.

### Submitter
Dong Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Yueming Yan
College of Life Science, Capital Normal University.


