### Accession
PXD004879

### Title
Subcellular proteomics analysis of different stages of colorectal cancer cell lines

### Description
Studying cell differentiation and transformation allows a better understanding of the mechanisms involved in the initiation and the evolution of cancer. The role of proteins which participate in these processes is dependent on their location within the cell. Determining the subcellular localization of proteins or the changes in localization is, therefore, paramount in elucidating their role. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we characterized the protein expression and subcellular localization of nearly 5,000 proteins from seven different colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines, as well as normal colon fibroblasts and intestinal epithelial cells. This cellular characterization allowed the identification of colon cancer-associated proteins with differential expression patterns as well as deregulated protein networks and pathways. Indeed, our results demonstrate differential expression of proteins involved in cell adhesion, cytoskeleton, and transcription in colon cancer cells compared to normal colon-derived cells. Pathway analyses identified different cellular functions, including endocytosis and eIF2 signaling, whose deregulation correlates with mutations found in the different CRC phenotypes. Our results provide an unbiased, quantitative and high-throughput approach to measure changes in protein expression and subcellular protein locations in different colorectal cancer cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin-digested peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. 10 l of the sample (2 g) in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were loaded with a constant flow of 4 l/min on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted in a PepMap C18 nanocolumn (75 m x 50 cm, Dionex Corporation) with a linear gradient of 5-35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over 240 minutes with a constant flow of 200 nl/min. The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the column was set to 40oC. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350-1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after the accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35% and resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 40 seconds and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed, searched and quantified using the MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8, employing the Human Uniprot database (16/07/2013, 88,354 entries). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis were: 2 miscleavages were allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzymes were Trypsin (K/R not before P); variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. A mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for precursor ions and a tolerance of 20 ppm was used for fragment ions. The re-quantify option was selected to calculate the ratio for isotopic patterns not assembled in SILAC pairs as often observed during pulldown experiments. To achieve reliable identifications, all proteins were accepted based on the criteria that the number of forward hits in the database was at least 100-fold higher than the number of reverse database hits, thus resulting in a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%. A minimum of 2 peptides was quantified for each protein. Protein isoforms and proteins that cannot be distinguished based on the peptides identified are grouped and displayed on a single line with multiple accession numbers

### Publication Abstract
Studying cell differentiation and transformation allows a better understanding of the mechanisms involved in the initiation and the evolution of cancer. The role of proteins which participate in these processes is dependent on their location within the cell. Determining the subcellular localization of proteins or the changes in localization is, therefore, paramount in elucidating their role. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we characterized the protein expression and subcellular localization of nearly 5000 proteins from seven different colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines, as well as normal colon fibroblasts and intestinal epithelial cells. This cellular characterization allowed the identification of colon cancer-associated proteins with differential expression patterns as well as deregulated protein networks and pathways. Indeed, our results demonstrate differential expression of proteins involved in cell adhesion, cytoskeleton, and transcription in colon cancer cells compared to normal colon-derived cells. Pathway analyses identified different cellular functions, including endocytosis and eIF2 signaling, whose deregulation correlates with mutations found in the different CRC phenotypes. Our results provide an unbiased, quantitative and high-throughput approach to measure changes in protein expression and subcellular protein locations in different CRC cell lines.

### Keywords
Subcellular proteomics, Colorectal cancer, Silac, Colon

### Affiliations
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Université de Sherbrooke
Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Francois-Michel Boisvert

### Lab Head
Dr Francois-Michel Boisvert
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Université de Sherbrooke


