### Accession
PXD008754

### Title
The chromatin modifiers SET-25 and SET-32 are required for initiation but not long-term maintenance of transgenerational epigenetic inheritance

### Description
Some epigenetic modifications are inherited from one generation to the next, providing a potential mechanism for the inheritance of environmentally acquired traits. Transgenerational inheritance of RNA interference phenotypes in C. elegans provides an excellent model to study this phenomenon, and whilst studies have implicated both chromatin modifications and small RNA pathways in heritable silencing their relative contributions remain unclear. Here we demonstrate that the histone methyltransferases SET-25 and SET-32 are required for the establishment of a transgenerational silencing signal, but not for long-term maintenance of this signal between subsequent generations suggesting that transgenerational epigenetic inheritance is a multi-step process, with distinct genetic requirements for establishment and maintenance of heritable silencing. Furthermore, small RNA sequencing reveals that the abundance of secondary siRNA (thought to be the effector molecules of heritable silencing) does not correlate with silencing phenotypes. Together, our results suggest that the current mechanistic models of epigenetic inheritance are incomplete.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Subcellular Fractionation. Large-scale populations of animals were grown on enriched peptone plates (20 mM NaCl, 20 g/L peptone, 25 g/L agar, 5 µg/mL cholesterol, 1 mM MgSO4, 25 mM K3PO4) seeded with NA22 E. coli bacteria. Animals were washed several times in M9 buffer before homogenisation. Approximately XXXX whole worms per strain were fractionated using a detergent solubility-based kit designed for tissue separations (Pierce Tissue Subcellular Fractionation Kit, Thermo). Briefly, whole worms were resuspended in XXX uL of cytosol extraction buffer containing protease inhibitors, combined with an equal volume of 0.7 mm zirconia beads in a 2 mL screw-cap tube, and bead-beated for 5 seconds at 4oC using in a BioSpec Products MiniBeadBeater-24. This extract was fractionated according to manufacturer’s instructions for the Pierce Tissue Subcellular Fractionation Kit (Thermo). The protein content in each fraction was quantified by an BCA protein assay (Thermo). Protein digestion, peptide clean-up and quantitation – Proteins from the Chromatin fraction (50ug) were denatured and reduced by in 2% SDS and 10 mM triscarboxyethylphosphine (TCEP), and 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 6.0 and 150 mM NaCl. The protein samples were heated to 65oC in a ThermoMixer-C (Eppendorf) for 10 min at 1000 rpm. Once cooled to room temperature, N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) was added to the fractions at a final concentration of 20 mM and allowed to incubate for 30min at room temperature. The fractions were buffer exchanged and trypsin digested using the SP3 method described previously (Ultrasensitive proteome analysis using paramagnetic bead technology. Hughes CS, Foehr S, Garfield DA, Furlong EE, Steinmetz LM, Krijgsveld J. Mol Syst Biol. 2014 Oct 30;10:757. doi: 10.15252/msb.20145625).  LC-MS/MS and analysis of spectra – Using a Thermo Fisher Scientific EasyLC 1200 UHPLC, peptides in 4% (vol/vol) formic acid (injection volume 3 μL, approximately 500ng peptides) were directly injected onto a 50 cm × 75 μm reverse phase C18 column with 1.9 μm particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH) with integrated emitter. Peptides were separated over a gradient from 4% acetonitrile to 32% acetonitrile over 30 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. The peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at +2.3 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using HCD fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra on the top 5 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data produced by the mass spectrometer were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo) and the Byonic Search Engine (Protein Metrics). Peptide and Protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was a combined C. elegans and E. coli Swissprot database downloaded on the 11th April 2017. The mass tolerance was set to 3 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm. Enzyme was set to trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to R/K) with up to 3 missed cleavages. Deamidation of N/Q, oxidation of M were set as common variable modifications of which only 1 was allowed. N-terminal pyro-E/Q, protein N-terminal acetylation, acetylation of K, methylation of K/R, dimethylation of K/R, trimethylation of K were set as rare variable modifications of which only 2 were allowed. N-ethylmaleimide on C was searched as a fixed modification. The output from the Byonic search has also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier given above.  Histone Peptide Quantitation. The ratio of each modified peptide to a control peptide (either the cognate unmodified peptide, or an unmodified peptide from elsewhere in the protein) was calculated from extracted ion chromatograms of each, across all samples. The area under each peak was integrated and ratios calculated. Boxplots were generated for these ratios across the 3 replicates in each strain using Tableau 10.3 and p-values calculated using a Student’s t-test in R version 3.3.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rnai, C. elegans chromatin

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Sydney, School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Colin Larance
The University of Sydney, School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.


