### Accession
PXD039001

### Title
Long non-coding RNA H19 regulates matrisome signature and impacts cell behavior on MSC-engineered extracellular matrices

### Description
The vast and promising class of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) has been under investigation for distinct therapeutic applications. Nevertheless, their role as molecular drivers of bone regeneration remains poorly studied. The lncRNA H19 mediates osteogenic differentiation of Mesenchymal Stem/Stromal Cells (MSCs) through the control of intracellular pathways. However, the effect of H19 on the extracellular matrix (ECM) components is still largely unknown. This research study was designed to decode the H19-mediated ECM regulatory network, and to reveal how the decellularized siH19-engineered matrices influence MSC proliferation and fate. This is particularly relevant for diseases in which the ECM regulation and remodelling processes are disrupted, such as  osteoporosis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were isolated from siH19-MSCs or respective control using an extraction buffer for matrix proteins enrichment, following 7 days of culture in osteogenic-inducing conditions. Briefly, cells were washed 4 times with cold PBS 1x and a 2 M urea solution [4 % (v/v) SDS (Sigma-Aldrich), 60 mM Tris-HCl (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich); pH=6.8] was used to solubilize the ECM and lysate the cells in the presence of protease (1:100, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and phosphatase inhibitors (1:100, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The solution was added directly to the cell culture plate to avoid losing ECM and culture plates were incubated for 30 min under constant rotation. The protein was collected to low binding microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf) and the lysates/solubilized ECM was spun down at 16 000 g for 5 min. Total protein concentration was quantified using the DC protein assay kit (Bio-Rad). Protein identification and quantitation was performed by nano LC-MS/MS, using an equipment composed by an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as described in https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32126314/

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic and data analysis was performed for proteins expressed in three independent experiments with fold-change (FC) differences ≥1.25 or ≤−1.25 and p<0.05. A minimum of two unique peptides were required for further evaluation. The differentially expressed proteins were classified according to Gene Ontology (GO) annotations. The enriched biological process analysis was performed using Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships (PANTHER) tool. Pathway analysis were performed using the software Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). For target validation, proteins were selected according to the following criteria: more than 4 unique peptides that simultaneously associate with cellular terms "non-structural extracellular" and "extracellular matrix" (p-value < 0.01) and with the molecular function “extracellular structural activity”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Non-coding rnas; fragility fractures; bone extracellular matrix; gene therapy; decellularization

### Affiliations
1) Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal 2) Instituto de Engenharia Biomédica (INEB), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal 3) Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Ines Almeida
1) Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal 2) Instituto de Engenharia Biomédica (INEB), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal 3) Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal


