### Accession
PXD011172

### Title
TcI and TcII DTUs isolated from chronic chagasic cardiac patients LC-MSMS

### Description
This work aimed to investigate the differential expression of proteins from two distinct genetic groups of T. cruzi (´DTUs´, TcI and TcII), isolated from chronically infected individuals displaying the cardiac form of Chagas’ disease. For this purpose, epimastigote forms of the two isolates were cultured in vitro and the cells recovered for protein extraction. Comparative two-dimensional gel electrophoreses were performed and differentially expressed spots selected for identification by mass spectrometry, followed by database searching and protein categorization. The two-dimensional electrophoretic profiles revealed the complex composition of the T. cruzi extracted proteome. In total 46 differentially expressed proteins were identified present in 40 distinct spots found in the comparative gel analyses. The comparative two-dimensional gel electrophoresis allowed detection of major differences in protein expression between two T. cruzi isolates, belonging to the TcI and TcII genotypes. Our findings suggest that patients displaying the cardiac form of the disease harbor parasites capable of exhibiting distinct proteomic profiles.

### Sample Protocol
The two T. cruzi samples (one PR150 - TcI and another 452 - TcII) were isolated from chronic chagasic patients from Minas Gerais, Brazil. The parasite isolates were obtained by blood culture technique using LIT medium and after that, the parasites were collected in PBS to proceed to protein extraction. 100mg of epimastigote cell pellets previously collected were homogenized and sonicated in a buffer containing 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 0.002% bromophenol blue in the presence of protease inhibitor cocktail. A step of 20,000g centrifugation was executed to guarantee the removal of all cell debris. The samples were then submitted to a two dimensional gel eletrophoresis (150 micrograms of protein extract) and significant visible protein spots were excised and send to protein digestion. The gel fragments were treated first with DTT and then with iodoacetamide to promove carbamidomethylation of cystein residues. After that the gel was washed with ammonium bicarbonate and a solution of trypsin was added to promote the proteolysis. Tryptic peptides were recovered from gel and submitted to a UHPLC-MS/MS analysis, using a C18 column for trapping and peptide separation and executing a DDA mass spectrometry analysis in a Q-exactive (Thermo scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1). Sequences from T. cruzi (strain: Sylvio X10/1-2012 and CL Brener Esmeraldo-like) were downloaded from TritrypDB (http://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/). The search for peptide-spectrum matches were performed by running a SequestHT algorithm including carbamidomethylation as fixed and oxidation of methionine as variable PTMs (no more than 3 variable modifications for peptide). The peptide-DB search was set to reach a tryptic precursor peptide lenght within a range of 350-5000Da, while exhibiting a mass tolerance error set was 0.1Da for precursor and 10ppm for fragments. All peptides reported were found within 1% false discovery rate limit.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T. cruzi; dtus; differential proteomics; chagas's disease

### Affiliations
Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Laboratório de Enzimologia e Proteômica, Instituto de Ciências Exatas e Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto, Brasil
Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto

### Submitter
William Borges

### Lab Head
Dr William Castro Borges
Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Laboratório de Enzimologia e Proteômica, Instituto de Ciências Exatas e Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto, Brasil


