### Accession
PXD022640

### Title
Surveyance of apparent proteome unfolding curves via thiol labelling

### Description
Census of apparent proteome unfolding curves following urea denaturation in cell lysate using thiol reactivity probe tetraphenylethene maleimide (TPE-MI).

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labelled Neuro2a cell lysates were treated with 0 M (light) or 0-6 M (heavy) urea in triplicate before labelling with TPE-MI. Samples then prepared for mass spectrometric analysis with no affinity or additional labelling steps.

### Data Protocol
Initial peptide identification and quantitation were completed using ProteomeDiscoverer, followed by peptide-level analyses using a custom pipeline built in-house using the Python programming language.

### Publication Abstract
Methods that assay protein foldedness with proteomics have generated censuses of apparent protein folding stabilities in biological milieu. However, different censuses poorly correlate with each other. Here, we show that the reason for this is that methods targeting foldedness through monitoring amino acid sidechain reactivity also detect changes in conformation and ligand binding, which can be a substantial fraction of the data. We show that the reactivity of only one quarter of cysteine or methionine sidechains in proteins in a urea denaturation curve of mammalian cell lysate can be confidently explained by a two-state unfolding isotherm. Contrary to that expected from unfolding, up to one third of the cysteines decreased reactivity. These cysteines were enriched in proteins with functions relating to unfolded protein stress. One protein, chaperone HSPA8, displayed changes arising from ligand and cofactor binding. Unmasking this hidden information using the approaches outlined here should improve efforts to understand both folding and the remodeling of protein function directly in complex biological settings.

### Keywords
Denaturation curve, Protein folding, Tetraphenylethene maleimide (tpe-mi), Cm

### Affiliations
Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Dezerae Cox

### Lab Head
Dr Danny M. Hatters
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne


