### Accession
PXD008040

### Title
SMARCA4 Phosphorilation inhibition

### Description
Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 9 (CDK9) as part of the PTEFb complex promotes transcriptional elongation and high-level gene expression. We now report that, paradoxically, CDK9 is also essential for maintaining gene silencing at heterochromatic loci. Through a live cell screen, we discovered that CDK9 inhibition reactivates epigenetically silenced genes in cancer, leading to restored tumor suppressor gene expression and cell differentiation, along with activation of endogenous retrovirus (ERV) genes. CDK9 inhibition maintains gene silencing directly through phosphorylation of the SWI/SNF protein SMARCA4 and indirectly through HP1α activation. Based on gene activation, we developed the highly selective and  2 potent CDK9 inhibitor MC180295 (IC50 =5.1nM) that has broad anti-cancer activity in-vitro and is effective in in-vivo cancer models. Additionally, CDK9 inhibition synergizes with the immune checkpoint inhibitor α-PD-1 in vivo, making it an excellent target for epigenetic therapy of cancer.

### Sample Protocol
YB5 Colon cancer cells were treated with or without 500nM MC180295 for 4 hours. Nuclear fraction was enriched using a hypotonic lysis buffer as previously described (Boden G, Sci Transl Med. 2015 Sep 9;7(304)). Proteins from the nuclear fraction were extracted with M-PER Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent (Thermo Scientific Ref. 78501) in the presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Halt™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Ref. 87785 and Halt™ Phosphatase Inhibitor Single-Use Cocktail Ref. 78428). Phosphoproteins were enriched from 500 µg of nuclear extracted proteins, using a phosphoprotein purification kit (QIAGEN Ref. 37101). Both samples were processed using in-StageTip method for digestion and peptide purification before performing LC-MS/MS proteomics analysis

### Data Protocol
The label-free proteomics analysis was performed using the nanoelectrospray ionization (ESI) tandem MS with a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The complete system was fully controlled by Xcalibur software (Version 3.0.63). Mass spectra processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388. The generated de-isotoped peak list was submitted to an in-house Mascot Server 2.2.07 for searching against the Homo sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID=9606, released 2017-05-10. 42,153 sequences). Mascot search parameters were set as follows: species, Homo sapiens; enzyme: trypsin; maximal two missed cleavage; dynamic modifications: phospho (S, T) and phospho (Y); mass tolerance: 20 ppm for precursor peptide ions and 0.4 dalton tolerance for MS/MS fragment ions. Phosphopeptides matches were filtered using an ion score cutoff of 30.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) promotes transcriptional elongation through RNAPII pause release. We now report that CDK9 is also essential for maintaining gene silencing at heterochromatic loci. Through a live cell drug screen with genetic confirmation, we discovered that CDK9 inhibition reactivates epigenetically silenced genes in cancer, leading to restored tumor suppressor gene expression, cell differentiation, and activation of endogenous retrovirus genes. CDK9 inhibition dephosphorylates the SWI/SNF protein BRG1, which contributes to gene reactivation. By optimization through gene expression, we developed a highly selective CDK9 inhibitor (MC180295, IC50&#xa0;= 5&#xa0;nM) that has broad anti-cancer activity in&#xa0;vitro and is effective in in&#xa0;vivo cancer models. Additionally, CDK9 inhibition sensitizes to the immune checkpoint inhibitor &#x3b1;-PD-1 in&#xa0;vivo, making it an excellent target for epigenetic therapy of cancer.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Colon cancer cells, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Professor of Pharmaceutical Sciences & Moulder Center for Drug Discovery Professor Lewis Katz School of Medicine Member Fox Chase Cancer Institute Director of Proteomics/Metabolomics Temple University School of Pharmacy
Assistant Professor 
Pharmacy School 
Temple University

### Submitter
Carlos Barrero

### Lab Head
Dr Salim Merali
Professor of Pharmaceutical Sciences & Moulder Center for Drug Discovery Professor Lewis Katz School of Medicine Member Fox Chase Cancer Institute Director of Proteomics/Metabolomics Temple University School of Pharmacy


