### Accession
PXD010425

### Title
Proteomic profiling of HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells of mesenchymal or amoeboid migratory phenotype

### Description
Amoeboid and mesenchymal migration of cancer cells both contribute to metastatic spreading of tumors. To characterize proteome changes underlying the different migratory modes, we performed mass spectrometry profiling of HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells undergoing mesenchymal-amoeboid transition induced by either doxycycline-inducible constitutively active RhoA or dasatinib treatment. Cells were kept in three-dimensional collagen gels with or without induction for 48 hours, lysed and processed for mass spectrometry analysis. In case of the inducible RhoA system, we also performed parallel two-dimensional experiments with cells on top of a dense layer of collagen (it was not feasible with dasatinib treatment).

### Sample Protocol
Sample volume containing 100ug of proteins was precipitated by four volumes of cold acetone (overnight at -20). After centrifugation were pellets wash 80% acetone and let dry. Samples were resuspended in 100mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate, Thermo pn: 90114,) reduced with 5mM TCEP  ( Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride,  sigma pn:4706)  for 30 min at 60 °C and alkylated with 10mM MMTS (S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate , sigma pn:64306).  For 10 min at room temperature.  Proteins were digested with trypsin (trypsin:protein ratio 1:50) overnight at 37 ºC. (1) TMT label was add (according to manufacturer protocol) , after 60 minutes labeling reaction was stoped by addition of hydroxylamine. All samples were pooled and vacuum dryed.  Samples were desalted  on Michrom C18 Opti Trap Macro (Optimize Technologies 10-04818-TN). Peptides were fractionated as follows.  100ul of sample containing cca 250ug of peptides were injected on to C18 column (kinetex 1.7um, EVO C18, 150x2.1mm) and separated with linear gadient from 0%A (of  20mM ammonium formate, 2% acetonitrile pH10) to 50%B(of  20mM ammonium formate, 80% acetonitrile pH10) in 32 minutes, flow 300ul/min. 32 Fractions were collected and pooled in to 8 fractions (2). Resulting fractions were dried and resuspended in 20ul of 1%TFA.  Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid . Mobile phase B was composed of 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm) at a flow rate of 15 &#956;l/min. Loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid . Peptides were eluted with gradient of B from 2% to 60% over 240 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Spectra were acquired on Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with 4 seconds duty cycle. Full MS spectra were acquired in orbitrap within mass range 350 - 1400 m/z with resolution 120 000 at 200 m/z and maximum injection time 50 ms. Most intense precursors were isolated by quadrupole with 1,6 m/z isolation window and fragmented using CID with collision energy set to 30 %. Fragment ions were detected in ion trap with scan range mode set to normal and scan rate set to rapid with maximum injection time 50 ms. Fragmented precursors were excluded from fragmentation for 60 seconds. For quantification information of TMT label were 10 most intense fragments isolated (simultaneous precursor selection) and fragmented in HCD on 65% energy , max accumulation time 140ms, and fragments were measured in orbitrap on 60K resolution.  (3)

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed in ProteomeDiscoverer 2.1. TMT reporter ions ratios were used for estimation of relative amount of each protein.  Search were done for latest version of Human Uniprot reference DB, sequence of protein of interest and common contaminant database. Modification were set: peptide N terminus , lysine (unimod nr:737) and Cystein  (unimod nr:39) as static, and methionoine oxidation (unimod : 1384 ),  and protein N terminus acetylation (unimod : 1 ) as variable.

### Publication Abstract
The plasticity of cancer cell invasion represents substantial hindrance for effective anti-metastatic therapy. To better understand the cancer cells' plasticity, we performed complex transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells undergoing mesenchymal-amoeboid transition (MAT). As amoeboid migratory phenotype can fully manifest only in 3D conditions, all experiments were performed with 3D collagen-based cultures. Two previously described approaches to induce MAT were used: doxycycline-inducible constitutively active RhoA expression and dasatinib treatment. RNA sequencing was performed with ribo-depleted total RNA. Protein samples were analysed with tandem mass tag (TMT)-based mass spectrometry. The data provide unprecedented insight into transcriptome and proteome changes accompanying MAT in true 3D conditions.

### Keywords
Human, Amoeboid, Fibrosarcoma, Cell migration

### Affiliations
Charles University
Charles University in Prague Faculty of Science Department of Cell Biology

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Brábek
Charles University in Prague Faculty of Science Department of Cell Biology


