### Accession
PXD016626

### Title
An interactive predictor to reassess the specific protein compositions of HIV-1 and extracellular vesicles

### Description
HIV-infected T cells secrete simultaneously viral particles and small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) including MVB-derived exosomes and plasma membrane-derived EVs. sEVs and HIV share many physical and chemical characteristics, which makes their separation difficult.. Here, we used a global and un-biased proteomic approach to identify novel specific markers of the virus or sEV subtypes secreted by a human T lymphoma cell line.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat cells were cultured in RPMI for SILAC (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with 10%  dialyzed fetal bovine serum (10,000 MW cut-off) and “medium” amino acids L-arginine-13C6 and L-lysine-4,4,5,5-D4 or “heavy” aminoacids L-arginine-13C615N4 and L-lysine-13C615N2 (Thermo Scientific). Cells were cultured for 12 days to achieve metabolic labeling and the incorporation efficiency was determined by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS). The reference pellet was obtained from cells grown in “heavy” labeled SILAC medium. Subfractions were obtained from SILAC “medium” labeled cells. Two biological replicates of subfractions were obtained separately from unifected or NL4-3 EGFP-Nef+ infected cells. The sub-fractions (F1), (F2) and (F3) were mixed with the reference fraction (Ref) obtained from heavy-SILAC labelled cells. The sub-fractions (HIV-F1), (HIV-F2) and (HIV-F3) from infected cells were mixed with the reference fraction from infected cells (HIV-Ref).  SILAC protein mixed samples were separated on 10% SDS-PAGE gels and separated proteins were recovered in 7 bands and in-gel digested as described in standard protocols. Peptides were extracted (70/35/5, MeCN/H2O/formic acid) from each gel slice, vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in injection buffer (2% MeCN, 0.3% TFA) before LC-MS/MS analysis using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Fisher Scientific)

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed with MaxQuant Version 1.6.1.13, with default settings, except for the following: multiplicity was set to 2, with Arg6 and Lys4 as light labels, and Arg10 and Lys8 as heavy labels. Requantify, match between runs, and iBAQ were enabled. The minimum ratio count for SILAC quantification was set to 1. For the experimental design, equivalent slices from the SDS PAGE gels were labelled with consecutive numbers (1 to 7 for control fractionation profiling samples, 11 to 17 for HIV1 infected fractionation profiling samples, and 101 to 107 for whole proteome samples (1, 11 and 101 correspond to the top slices of the gels). Hence, only identifications from equivalent and directly adjacent slices were matched. The human SwissProt protein reference database was downloaded from UniProt (2019_07_29, canonical and isoform data), and augmented with second a custom-made HIV protein Fasta file. The latter was based on the sequence information for the HIV1 strain used in this study (HIV-1 vector pNL4-3, GenBank: AF324493.2). The file contains individual HIV protein sequences as would be obtained post-processing of the viral multiprotein precursors.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hiv-1, Extracellular vesicles, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


