### Accession
PXD000707

### Title
Discovery and Confirmation of a Protein Biomarker Panel with Potential to Predict Response to Biologic Therapy in Psoriatic Arthritis

### Description
An integrated discovery to targeted proteomics approach was used to investigate the protein profiles of good and non–responders to anti-TNF-alpha and T-cell inhibitor treatments in PsA patients. Reverse phase liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry was used to generate protein profiles of synovial tissue obtained at baseline from 10 PsA patients who then commenced anti-TNF-alpha therapy (adalimumab). Targeted proteomics using multiple reaction monitoring was used to confirm and pre-validate a potential protein biomarker panel in 18 and 7 PsA patient samples respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Baseline synovial tissue samples obtained under local anesthesia was processed in a microdismembrator and the protein was extracted in urea lysis buffer. Protein assay was carried out usinf modified Bradford assay and digested enzymatically with  trypsin. The resulting peptides were separated with liquid chromatography and analysed with label free mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS and MS/MS data was manually inspected using the MassHunter qualitative and quantitative analysis software (version B.04.00 Agilent).  Protein identification was carried out using X! Tandem wIth the aid of transproteomic pipeline (TPP) to build the spectral library. Progenesis LC-MS software (Version 2.6) (http://www.nonlinear.com/) was used for the quantitative analysis of peptide features. Subjects were grouped according to their response categories. Abundance profiles of compounds were searched manually for significant differences. Isotopic and chromatographic profiles of features were reviewed manually and compounds exhibiting poorly defined profiles were excluded from further analysis. Principal component analysis (PCA) was carried out to validate clustering of patients according to their response categories with a selection of molecular features with the highest separation power between the groups. Analysis of the data by progenesis included retention time alignment to a reference sample, feature filtering (based on retention time, m/z, charge (2-7) and number of isotopes (>2)), normalisation, intensity evaluation, multivariate statistical analysis, peptide search, peptide filter and protein view. P-value and fold changes in the quantitative expression were calculated. The relative abundance of peptide features were used for peptide quantification and the proteins were identified with the aid of mascot database searches (v2.2 Matrix Sciences)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Anti-tnf-alpha, Biomarkers, Synovial tissue, Psoriatic arthritis

### Affiliations
UCD Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.
Conway Institute

### Submitter
Stephen Pennington

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Roy Pennington
UCD Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.


