### Accession
PXD039301

### Title
Identification of the DNALI1  interactome from human sperm to identify its role in sperm motility

### Description
DNALI1 was immunoprecipitated from human sperm to identify the interactome of this protein for further functional studies.

### Sample Protocol
To conduct IP, we accumulated 8ml of human semen, and rinsed thrice with PBS, prior to lysis in RIPA buffer (P0013B, Beyotime) with phosphatase inhibitor cocktail A,50X (P1082, Beyotime) and phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (ST505, Beyotime). Both human sperm and mice testes (200mg) underwent homogenization in 2ml lysis buffer on ice for 40 min, prior to centrifugation at 12 000 g for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was saved in a new tube for IP analysis as follows: First, it underwent ON incubation with anti-DNALI1 at 4°C, followed by treatment with protein A/G (Bimake, B23202) beads for 2 h at 4°C. Subsequently, the precipitants were twice rinsed in IP buffer (20mMTris, pH7.4, 2mM EGTA and 1% NP-40), and the immune complexes were eluted with sample buffer and 1% SDS for 10 min at 95°C, prior to analysis via immunoblotting or mass spectrometry (MS). The IP precipitants were separated using the PAGE-gel, and stained via AgNO3. The gels were cut following trypsin digestion. The EASY-nanoLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific), equipped with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), via a nano spray ion source, was employed for LC-MS/MS analysis. Tryptic peptide mixtures were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) in LC-grade water in an analytical column (75 μm×25 cm, C18 column, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). A 95-min linear gradient (3%-5% B for 5 sec, 5%-15% B for 40 min, 15%-28% B for 34 min and 50 sec, 28%-38% B for 12 min, 30%-100% B for 5 sec, and 100% B for 8 min) was applied during the buffer (0.1% FA (buffer A) and 80% ACN, 0.1% FA (buffer B)) incubation using a high resolution MS pre-scan, and a mass range of 350-1500. The normalized collision energy for elevated energy collision-driven dissociation (HCD) was adjusted to 28, and the resulting fragments were identified using a resolution of 15,000. All ions chosen for fragmentation were eliminated for 30 s via dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) and Mouse reference proteome from SwissProt database (release 2019_07) using standard parameters.

### Publication Abstract
The axonemal dynein arms (outer (ODA) and inner dynein arms (IDAs)) are multiprotein structures organized by light, intermediate, light intermediate (LIC), and heavy chain proteins. They hydrolyze ATP to promote ciliary and flagellar movement. Till now, a variety of dynein protein deficiencies have been linked with asthenospermia (ASZ), highlighting the significance of these structures in human sperm motility. Herein, we detected bi-allelic DNALI1 mutations [c.663_666del (p.Glu221fs)], in an ASZ patient, which resulted in the complete loss of the DNALI1 in the patient's sperm. We identified loss of sperm DNAH1 and DNAH7 rather than DNAH10 in both DNALI1<sup>663_666del</sup> patient and Dnali1<sup>-/-</sup> mice, demonstrating that mammalian DNALI1 is a LIC protein of a partial IDA subspecies. More importantly, we revealed that DNALI1 loss contributed to asymmetries in the most fibrous sheath (FS) of the sperm flagellum in both species. Immunoprecipitation revealed that DNALI1 might interact with the cytoplasmic dynein complex proteins in the testes. Furthermore, DNALI1 loss severely disrupted the transport and assembly of the FS proteins, especially AKAP3 and AKAP4, during flagellogenesis. Hence, DNALI1 may possess a non-classical molecular function, whereby it regulates the cytoplasmic dynein complex that assembles the flagella. We conclude that a DNALI deficiency-induced IDAs injury and an asymmetric FS-driven tail rigid structure alteration may simultaneously cause flagellum immotility. Finally, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) can effectively resolve patient infertility. Collectively, we demonstrate that DNALI1 is a newly causative gene for AZS in both humans and mice, which possesses multiple crucial roles in modulating flagellar assembly and motility.

### Keywords
Human, Sperm, Ida, Dnali1, Asthenospermia

### Affiliations
Anhui Medical University
NHC Key Laboratory of Study on Abnormal Gametes and Reproductive Tract, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China.

### Submitter
Rong Hua

### Lab Head
Dr Rong Hua
NHC Key Laboratory of Study on Abnormal Gametes and Reproductive Tract, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China.


