### Accession
PXD009918

### Title
Guard cell proteome -  Dawn regulates guard cell proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana that function in ATP production from fatty acid beta-oxidation

### Description
Proteome changes that happen in the guard cells during dawn were up till now poorly described. Bad accessibility to pure and intact guard cell samples can be considered as the primary reason behind this lack of knowledge. By elucidating the identities of enzymes that change in abundance by the transition from dark to light, we corroborate the hypothesis that respiratory ATP production for stomatal opening results from fatty acid beta-oxidation.

### Sample Protocol
Guard cells were sampled and prepared according to the method described in Cornish & Zeevaart (1986). For this, the epidermis was peeled (see Shen et al.; 2015). Proteins were extracted following the phenol extraction/ammonium acetate precipitation method described by Carpentier et al. 2005. The UPLC–MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) as described by Campos et al. (2016)

### Data Protocol
All raw data were converted into mgf files using Proteome discoverer (Version 1.4, ThermoFisher Scientific). The spectra were searched using Mascot (Version 2.2.06; Matrix science, London, England) against an in house database containing all UniProt Arabidopsis thaliana accessions plus contaminants of keratin and trypsin (54115 sequences). The following settings were used: the enzyme was trypsin and two miscleavages were allowed, cystein-carbamidomethylation was chosen as a fixed modification and variable modifications: +1 on NQ (Deamidated), +16 on M (Oxidation) methionine-oxidation. Precursor peptide charge state was 2+ and 3+, error window on experimental peptide mass values was 10 ppm and 20 absolute milli-mass units were chosen for fragment ion mass tolerance. Peptides assigned to keratin or trypsin were not taken into account. For data validation, the false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Scaffold (Version: Scaffold 3.6.3; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA). An integrated version of X! Tandem (Version: CYCLONE, 2010.12.01.1) in Scaffold was used for an additional database searching. For FDR calculation, the searching results from both Mascot and X! Tandem were combined automatically by Scaffold with the following settings: at least one peptide with confidence level of 95%.  For functional characterization of the proteins, annotations by Gene Ontology (GO) were retrieved from UniProt (www.uniprot.org) using our in-house software tool. Quantitative analysis was performed using Progenesis LC–MS version 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics)

### Publication Abstract
Based on the nature of the proteins that are altered in abundance, we conclude that guard cells switch their energy source from fatty acid metabolism to chloroplast activity, at the onset of dawn. During stomatal opening at dawn, evidence was recently presented for a breakdown and liquidation of stored triacylglycerols in guard cells to supply ATP for use in stomatal opening. However, proteome changes that happen in the guard cells during dawn were until now poorly understood. Bad accessibility to pure and intact guard cell samples can be considered as the primary reason behind this lack of knowledge. To overcome these technical constraints, epidermal guard cell samples with ruptured pavement cells were isolated at 1&#xa0;h pre-dawn, 15&#xa0;min post-dawn and 1&#xa0;h post-dawn from Arabidopsis thaliana. Proteomic changes were analysed by ultra-performance-liquid-chromatography-mass-spectrometry. With 994 confidently identified proteins, we present the first analysis of the A. thaliana guard cell proteome that is not influenced by side effects of guard cell protoplasting. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009918. By elucidating the identities of enzymes that change in abundance by the transition from dark to light, we corroborate the hypothesis that respiratory ATP production for stomatal opening results from fatty acid beta-oxidation. Moreover, we identified many proteins that were never reported in the context of guard cell biology. Among them are proteins that might play a role in signalling or circadian rhythm.

### Keywords
Dawn, Arabidopsis, Guard cell

### Affiliations
SYBIOMA KULeuven
KULeuven

### Submitter
Sebastien Carpentier

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastien Carpentier
SYBIOMA KULeuven


