### Accession
PXD002278

### Title
Bacteriophage vB_EcoP_SU10, LC-MS/MS

### Description
A recently isolated phage, vB_EcoP_SU10 (SU10) with unusual elongated C3 morphotype, can infect a wide range of E.coli strains. We have sequenced the genome of SU10, and further characterization has been conducted by MS-based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The phage was concentrated by PEG precipitation but not further purified by CsCl gradient centrifugation. The highly concentrated PEG precipitated phage samples were solubilized in lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 1mM DTT and 50 mM PBS heated at 95 ̊C for 5 min followed by sonication for 1 min to shear DNA, and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 min. The supernatant was subjected to spin filter sample preparation, digested with trypsin. Detail protocol will be found in the publication, Khan Mirzaei M et al., PLOS ONE 9 (12): e116294 (2014)

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was searched using SEQUEST under the Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288 (DB version 79) against the predicted proteins inferred from the phage vB_EcoP_Su10 genomic analysis with 99% confidence cut off limit. A precursor muss tolerance of 10 ppm and product mass tolerances of 0.02 Da for HCD-FTMS and 0.8 Da for CID-ITMS were used. Further settings used were trypsin with 1 missed cleavage;

### Publication Abstract
A recently isolated phage, vB_EcoP_SU10 (SU10), with the unusual elongated C3 morphotype, can infect a wide range of Escherichia coli strains. We have sequenced the genome of this phage and characterized it further by mass spectrometry based proteomics, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and ultra-thin section electron microscopy. The genome size is 77,327 base pairs and its genes, and genome architecture, show high similarity to the phiEco32 phage genes and genome. The TEM images reveal that SU10 have a quite long tail for being a Podoviridae phage, and that the tail also changes conformation upon infection. The ultra-thin section electron microscopy images of phages at the stage of replication within the host cell show that the phages form a honeycomb-like structure under packaging of genomes and assembly of mature capsids. This implies a tight link between the replication and cutting of the concatemeric genome, genome packaging, and capsid assembly. We have also performed a phylogenetic analysis of the structural genes common between Podoviridae phages of the C1 and C3 morphotypes. The result shows that the structural genes have coevolved, and that they form two distinct groups linked to their morphotypes. The structural genes of C1 and C3 phages appear to have diverged around 280 million years ago applying a molecular clock calibrated according to the presumed split between the Escherichia - Salmonella genera.

### Keywords
Su10, Lc-ms/ms, Bacteriohage

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University
Niigata University of Pharmacy and Applied Life Sciences

### Submitter
Kie Kasuga

### Lab Head
Dr Anders S Nilsson
Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University


