### Accession
PXD017442

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of mouse hematopoietic stem cells and their progenitors reveals differential expression within and between proteome and transcriptome throughout adult and aged hematopoiesis

### Description
mass spectrometry analysis of aged and adult hematopoietic stem cells, multipotent progenitors and oligopotent progenitors

### Sample Protocol
Processing of purified cell types for mass spectrometry analysis  Sorted cells were pelleted and washed 2x with ice-cold PBS to remove any remaining FBS (1,300 rpm x 5 min 4°C). PBS was aspirated away, and the pellets were snap frozen with liquid nitrogen prior to storage at -80°C. Prior to lysis, cells were thawed on ice and subjected to sample preparation with the PreOmics iST NHS kit according to literature protocol. To normalize lysis across cell number, 10 μL of lysis buffer was added for every 100,000 cells).  The only additional modification made to the protocol was scaling down in volume of digest buffer to align with amount of lysis buffer (for example, 20 μL digest buffer for 20 μL lysis buffer). Samples were resuspended in 12 μL of LC-Load Buffer from the iST NHS kit and peptide concentration determined (Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric or Fluorescent Peptide Assay). Sample concentration was normalized to 100 ng/μL and 2 μL was loaded onto the instrument.     Mass spectrometry analysis – liquid chromatography and timsTOF Pro  A nanoElute was attached in line to a timsTOF Pro equipped with a CaptiveSpray Source (Bruker). Chromatography was conducted at 40°C through a 25cm reversed-phase Aurora Series C18 column (IonOpticks) at a constant flow-rate of 0.4 μL/min. Mobile phase A was 98/2/0.1% Water/MeCN/Formic Acid (v/v/v) and phase B was MeCN with 0.1% Formic Acid (v/v). During a 120 min method, peptides were separated by a 4-step linear gradient (0% to 15% B over 60 min, 15% to 23% B over 30 min, 23% to 35% B over 10 min, 35% to 80% over 10 min) followed by a 10 min isocratic flush at 80% for 10 min before washing and a return to low organic conditions. Experiments were run as data-dependent acquisitions with ion mobility activated in PASEF mode. MS and MS/MS spectra were collected with m/z X00 to 1500 and ions with z = +1 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis  Raw data files were processed with Byonic software. Fixed modifications included +113.084 C. Variable modifications included Acetyl +42.010565 N-term, pyro-Glu -17.026549 N-term Q, pyro-Glu -18.010565 N-term E. Precursor tolerance 30.0 ppm.     Data compilation  For our compiled datasets and consistency for future mRNA comparisons, we generated lists of all UniProtIDs, gene names and their respective mappings that appear in all raw mouse cell files. All ‘nan’, ‘’ (empty strings), and ‘2 SV’ were ignored. We used the Retrieve/ID mapping program available at uniprot.org to find all possible gene name mappings for each UniProtID and all possible UniProtID mappings for each gene name. Using the data from the raw files and mappings from UniProt, we recursively mapped between UniProtIDs and gene names, 1) identifying all sets of UniProtID and gene name aliases, and 2) creating a list of unique mappings between every UniProtID aliases and gene name aliases. Any unnamed set of aliases were given a protein ID (UNM #) or a gene name (Unm #). For each given mapping between UniProtID aliases and gene name aliases, a single UniProtID alias and gene name alias were selected. During compilation of data for analysis, each UniProtID and gene name from a raw file was replaced by the selected aliases for consistency.

### Publication Abstract
The balance of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) self-renewal and differentiation is critical for a healthy blood supply; imbalances underlie hematological diseases. The importance of HSCs and their progenitors have led to their extensive characterization at genomic and transcriptomic levels. However, the proteomics of hematopoiesis remains incompletely understood. Here we report a proteomics resource from mass spectrometry of mouse young adult and old adult mouse HSCs, multipotent progenitors and oligopotent progenitors; 12 cell types in total. We validated differential protein levels, including confirmation that Dnmt3a protein levels are undetected in young adult mouse HSCs until forced into cycle. Additionally, through integrating proteomics and RNA-sequencing datasets, we identified a subset of genes with apparent post-transcriptional repression in young adult mouse HSCs. In summary, we report proteomic coverage of young and old mouse HSCs and progenitors, with broader implications for understanding mechanisms for stem cell maintenance, niche interactions and fate determination.

### Keywords
Hematopoiesis, Stem cells, Aging, Early blood progenitors, Hematopoietic stem cells

### Affiliations
Stanford University
STANFORD INSTITUTE FOR STEM CELL BIOLOGY AND REGENERATIVE MEDICINE, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA

### Submitter
Janos Demeter

### Lab Head
Dr Irving L. Weissman
STANFORD INSTITUTE FOR STEM CELL BIOLOGY AND REGENERATIVE MEDICINE, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA


