### Accession
PXD022467

### Title
Loss of full-length hnRNP R isoform impairs DNA damage response in motoneurons by inhibiting Yb1 recruitment to Chromatin

### Description
Neurons critically rely on the functions of RNA-binding proteins to maintain their polarity and resistance to neurotoxic stresses. HnRNP R has a diverse range of post-transcriptional regulatory functions and is important for neuronal development by regulating axon growth. Hnrnpr pre-mRNA undergoes alternative splicing to produce transcripts encoding two protein isoforms: a full-length protein and a shorter form lacking the N-terminal acidic domain. While the neuronal defects produced by total hnRNP R depletion have been investigated before, the individual functions of each hnRNP R isoforms are unknown. We generated a Hnrnpr knockout mouse (Hnrnprtm1a/tm1a) showing selective loss of the full-length hnRNP R isoform. Motoneurons cultured from Hnrnprtm1a/tm1a mice did not show any axonal growth defects. However, they show an accumulation of double-strand breaks and an impaired DNA damage response. Proteomic analysis of the hnRNP R interactome revealed the multifunctional Y-box binding protein 1 (Yb1) as a top interactor. Yb1 depleted motoneurons also exhibit defects in DNA ´damage repair. We show that Yb1 is recruited to chromatin upon DNA damage, a mechanism that is dependent on full length hnRNP R. Our findings thus suggest a novel role of hnRNP R in maintaining genomic integrity and highlight the function of its N-terminal acidic domain in this context.

### Sample Protocol
NSC-34 cells were seeded on a 10 cm cell culture dish and grown to 80-90% confluency. the protocol from  was used with modificationsCells were washed once with ice-cold PBS and incubated in 4 ml cytosolic fractionation buffer (10 mM HEPES, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 35 µg/ml digitonin) on ice for 10 min. The extract was collected and centrifuged at 2,000×g for 10 min at 4°C. Following centrifugation, the supernatant was collected as the cytosolic fraction (Cy). The cell culture dish was washed once with ice-cold PBS and 4 ml nuclear fractionation buffer (10 mM HEPES, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP-40) were added. The cell lysate was collected, incubated on ice for 15 min and centrifuged at 20,000×g for 15 min at 4°C. After centrifugation, chromatin-bound proteins were precipitated in the pellet. The supernatant containing organellar and nuclear luminal proteins was collected as the nuclear soluble fraction (Ns).  The pellet containing the chromatin-bound fraction (Cb) was washed once with ice-cold PBS and dissolved in 4 ml RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0 Buffer, 150 mM NaCl, 1.0% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS), followed by sonication at 100% amplitude, cycle 0.5, for 1 min on ice (Ultrasonic Processor UP50H/UP100H, Hielscher Ultrasonics), and incubation with 1 U of Benzonase (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) at 4°C for 30 min on a rotator to allow complete digestion of nucleic acids.  To investigate the RNA- and DNA-dependency of chromatin-bound proteins, the protocol from (Yang, Gal et al. 2014) was used with modifications. After removal of the cytosolic fraction, cells were washed once with ice-cold PBS and lysed in nuclear fractionation buffer. The nuclear lysate was distributed equally to 1.5 ml tubes and incubated on ice for 15 min. Samples were centrifuged at 20,000x g for 15 min at 4°C, and supernatants were discarded. The pellets were washed once with PBS and resuspended in equal amounts of RIPA buffer. One aliquot was sonicated, treated with 1 U of Benzonase and incubated on a rotator at 4°C for 30 min.  For RNA digestion, samples were treated with RNase A (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 20 min at RT. As control, RNase A was omitted.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (v 1.2.2.0, and 1.2.3) (Cox and Mann 2008) and Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann 2011) were employed to process MS raw data searching against the mouse fasta database (ipi.MOUSE.v3.68.) using standard settings (Hornburg, Drepper et al. 2014). Protein intensities were normalized with MaxLFQ (Cox, Hein et al. 2014) and filtered for common contaminants (n=247). Raw protein intensities are provided as supplementary Table S2. For data analysis and visualization Perseus was used. MaxLFQ intensities were log2 transformed and missing values were imputed with a normal distribution (width=0.3; shift=1.8). Significantly enriched proteins in pairwise interactome comparisons were determined by t-test statistics applying a permutation-based (250 permutations) false discovery rate of 5% and S0 of 0.1 (Tusher, Tibshirani et al. 2001).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Motoneurons, Hnrnpr, Proteomics, Ip, Ftld, Als, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Max-Planck of Biochemistry, Experimental Systems Immunology Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Meissner
Max-Planck of Biochemistry, Experimental Systems Immunology Germany


