### Accession
PXD008610

### Title
Lactuca sativa L. iTRAQ -  Quantitative Proteomics Analysis of Lettuce (Lactuca sativa L

### Description
Bolting is a key process in the growth and development of lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.). High temperature can induce earlier bolting which decreases in both quality and production of lettuce. However, knowledge underlying lettuce bolting is still lacking. To better understand the molecular basis of bolting, a comparative proteomics analysis was conducted on lettuce stems in the bolting period induced by high temperature (33 °C) compared with a control (20 °C) using iTRAQ-based proteomics, phenotypic measures, and biological verifications. High temperature induced lettuce bolting, while control temperature did not. Of the 6656 proteins identified, 758 proteins significantly altered their expression level induced by high-temperature relative to the control, of which 409 were up-regulated and 349 down-regulated. Proteins with abundance level change were mainly involved in photosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, stress response, hormone synthesis, and signal transduction. These differential proteins were mainly enriched in pathways associated with photosynthesis and tryptophan metabolism involving in auxin (IAA) biosynthesis. Among the differentially expressed proteins associated with photosynthesis and tryptophan metabolism were up-regulated. Moreover, in gibberellin (GA) biosynthesis pathway, 10 of main enzymes of P450 were up-regulated. Proteins related to SAUR and GRP, implicated in IAA and GA signal transduction were up-regulated, and the phosphorylation and ubiquitination related proteins regulating IAA and GA signal transduction were also induced. These findings indicate that a high temperature enhances the function of photosynthesis, IAA and GA synthesis and signal transduction to promote the process of bolting, which is in line with the physiology and transcription levels of IAA and GA metabolism. Our data provide a first comprehensive dataset for gaining novel understanding of the molecular basis underlying lettuce bolting induced by high temperature. It is potentially important for further functional analysis and genetic manipulation for molecular breeding to breed new cultivar of lettuce to restrain early bolting, which is vital for improving vegetable quality.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of GB-30 lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.), an easily bolting variety, were numbered and conserved in our laboratory, sown in a sand/soil/peat (1:1:1 v/v) mixture, and grown in the Beijing University of Agriculture Experimental Station of Beijing under standard greenhouse conditions (14 h light; 300~1300 μmol/(m2 s); 20 ± 2 °C during the day; 13 ± 2 °C at night; 10 h dark; and 50%-70% relative humidity). The seedlings were transplanted into 10 cm pots at the trefoil stage. When the lettuce plants developed the sixth true leaf, they were moved to a growth chamber under the condition of temperatures of 20/13 °C (day/night), a 14/10 h photoperiod, and 60% relative humidity for two days of acclimatization. After that, the plants were divided into two groups. The control group was kept under the standard greenhouse conditions as described above. The other group (group H) was moved to another growth chamber and treated with high temperatures of 33 and 25 °C during the day and night, respectively. The other environmental conditions were unchanged. The stem lengths (in cm) of the control and treatment plants were measured every eight days using a ruler. At the same time, the blossom buds were observed by stereoscopic microscope and paraffin method (Zhang et al., 2016) to define the progress of flower bud differentiation. After 32 days, stem samples from the control and treatment plants were collected, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C for further measurements on endogenous hormones and proteome analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.) against Lactuca.Unigene.pep.fasta (lettuce protein database translated from transcriptome created by our laboratory). For protein identification, the following options were used: peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ 8-plex (K), iTRAQ 8-plex (N-term), Variable modification: Oxidation (M), FDR≤0.01. The relative quantification of protein was based on the strength of the reporter ion, which reflects the relative abundance of peptide. The protein ratio (fold-change) was obtained according to different comparison groups (control and high temperature treatment) through the reporter ion ratio labeled with different isotopes as described above. For differentially expressed proteins, one can use a protein containing at least two unique spectra, and only these unique spectra, for the quantification of proteins. Only fold-changes of >1.20 or <0.84, the ratios with p-values of <0.05 and expected cutoff values of less than 0.05 with 95% confidence, were considered as significant. Median intensities were used as normalization, and outliers were removed automatically (the quantitative protein ratio was normalized by the median ratio in Mascot).

### Publication Abstract
Bolting is a key process in the growth and development of lettuce (<i>Lactuca sativa</i> L.). A high temperature can induce early bolting, which decreases both the quality and production of lettuce. However, knowledge of underlying lettuce bolting is still lacking. To better understand the molecular basis of bolting, a comparative proteomics analysis was conducted on lettuce stems, during the bolting period induced by a high temperature (33 &#xb0;C) and a control temperature (20 &#xb0;C) using iTRAQ-based proteomics, phenotypic measures, and biological verifications using qRT-PCR and Western blot. The high temperature induced lettuce bolting, while the control temperature did not. Of the 5454 identified proteins, 619 proteins presented differential abundance induced by high-temperature relative to the control group, of which 345 had an increased abundance and 274 had a decreased abundance. Proteins with an abundance level change were mainly enriched in pathways associated with photosynthesis and tryptophan metabolism involved in auxin (IAA) biosynthesis. Moreover, among the proteins with differential abundance, proteins associated with photosynthesis and tryptophan metabolism were increased. These findings indicate that a high temperature enhances the function of photosynthesis and IAA biosynthesis to promote the process of bolting, which is in line with the physiology and transcription level of IAA metabolism. Our data provide a first comprehensive dataset for gaining novel understanding of the molecular basis underlying lettuce bolting induced by high temperature. It is potentially important for further functional analysis and genetic manipulation for molecular breeding to breed new cultivars of lettuce to restrain early bolting, which is vital for improving vegetable quality.

### Keywords
Bolting, Lettuce, Proteome, High temperature, Itraq, Western-blot

### Affiliations
Beijing University of Agriculture

### Submitter
Jinghong Hao

### Lab Head
Dr Shuangxi Fan
Beijing University of Agriculture


