### Accession
PXD022706

### Title
Mouse DRG incision injury versus sham_DIA-MS

### Description
Acute pain after surgery is still managed insufficiently. One major need is, therefore, the identification of new targets specifically relevant for postoperative pain to develop effective and non-addictive analgesics. To this end, we have used the plantar incision model in male mice and DIA-MS to reveal unprecedented insights into proteome dynamics in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) 24 hours after incision.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed as previously described in Rouwette et al, 2015 (DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M116.058966 )

### Data Protocol
Data were processed as previously described in Rouwette et al, 2015 (DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M116.058966 ) with the modification that data were analyzed with Spectronaut Pulsar (Biognosys AG, Switzerland).

### Publication Abstract
After surgery, acute pain is still managed insufficiently and may lead to short-term and long-term complications including chronic postsurgical pain and an increased prescription of opioids. Thus, identifying new targets specifically implicated in postoperative pain is of utmost importance to develop effective and nonaddictive analgesics. Here, we used an integrated and multimethod workflow to reveal unprecedented insights into proteome dynamics in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) of mice after plantar incision (INC). Based on a detailed characterization of INC-associated pain-related behavior profiles, including a novel paradigm for nonevoked pain, we performed quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomics in DRG 1 day after INC. Our data revealed a hitherto unknown INC-regulated protein signature in DRG with changes in distinct proteins and cellular signaling pathways. In particular, we show the differential regulation of 44 protein candidates, many of which are annotated with pathways related to immune and inflammatory responses such as MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated kinases signaling. Subsequent orthogonal assays comprised multiplex Western blotting, bioinformatic protein network analysis, and immunolabeling in independent mouse cohorts to validate (1) the INC-induced regulation of immune/inflammatory pathways and (2) the high priority candidate Annexin A1. Taken together, our results propose novel potential targets in the context of incision and, therefore, represent a highly valuable resource for further mechanistic and translational studies of postoperative pain.

### Keywords
Pain, Incision injury, Drg, Dia-ms

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine
Head of Systems Biology of Pain Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Christin Kappert 

### Lab Head
Dr Manuela Schmidt
Head of Systems Biology of Pain Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria


