### Accession
PXD010812

### Title
A comprehensive and combined analysis of transcriptome and proteome reveals key factors of ischemia-reperfusion injury in human liver transplantation

### Description
INTRODUCTION Ischemia and reperfusion injury (IRI)-elicited tissue injury contributes to morbidity and mortality in a wide range of pathologies, including myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke, acute kidney injury, trauma, circulatory arrest 1. Ischemia-reperfusion injury is also a major challenge during organ transplantation and cardiothoracic, vascular and general surgery 1. IRI, one of the biggest challenges for organ transplantation, continues to be a vital source of morbidity among recipients, especially in liver transplantation 2. With the enlarging shortage of available donor livers, the increased use of extended criteria donor grafts further increases IRI, adversely affecting both short-term and long-term outcomes of graft and patient survival 3. Numerous studies have investigated the benefits of pharmacological, heat shock, and ischemic preconditioning interventions aimed at decreasing liver IRI 4. However, the benefit was limited. Our center has been making great effort in conquering IRI and have developed a novel surgical technique called ischemia-free liver transplantation 5. It is an ultimate method to overcome IRI in liver transplantation, but there is still a long way to popularize it. As a result, it is still of great significance to study IRI and identify the core genes in the process and the underlying mechanism.  Comprehensive bioinformatics analysis has been increasingly important as a method to study various pathological and physiological condition 6. By enrolling multiple omics or combining different types of omics, comprehensive bioinformatics analysis was able to recognize key factors that could have potentially pathogenic impact such as gene expression, protein function, and downstream pathways. With the rapid development of high-throughput sequencing technologies, several transcriptomic datasets on IRI of liver transplantation have become available in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Herein, we recruited 3 GEO datasets to conduct comprehensive analysis with the GEO dataset from our center. Moreover, we performed the first proteome of liver tissues to study liver IRI. Then the transcriptome and proteome were used for combined analysis to reveal key factors in liver IRI.

### Sample Protocol
Methods: 3 Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets of liver transplantation (GSE15480, GSE14951, and GSE12720) and a dataset conducted by our center (GSE113024) were collected for a comprehensive analysis. The co-expressed diﬀerentially expressed genes (DEGs), intersecting pathways and key biological processes were identified and validated with clinical samples. Then we performed a proteome of ischemic livers and reperfused livers. Diﬀerentially expressed proteins, functional enrichment including GO terms, protein domain enrichment and KEGG pathway analysis were identified. Correlation of transcriptome and proteome were analyzed. Co-expressed DEGs and co-regulated markers were used for discovering the core factors in IRI.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis Student’s t-test and analysis of variance were used to evaluate significant differences in demographic data. Spearman chi-square test was used to identify the correlation of genes and proteins expression in transcriptome and proteome. All P values were two-sided, and P<0.05 was defined as statistically significant. Analyses were carried out by the Statistical Package for the Social Science (SPSS) 22.0 (IBM, USA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ischemia reperfusion injury; transcriptome; proteome; comprehensive analysis; combined analysis; liver transplantation

### Affiliations
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy
Department of Liver Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoshun He
Department of Liver Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China


