### Accession
PXD039084

### Title
Proteome analysis of contrasting rice genotypes under phosphorus-starvation stress

### Description
This study aims to deal with a comparative proteome analysis of shoot and root tissues of contrasting phosphorus (P) responsive rice genotypes (Pusa-44 and its near-isogenic line (NIL)-23 harboring Pup1 QTL). Proteins were isolated from shoot and root tissues collected from 45-day-old rice plants grown hydroponically in PusaRicH medium with P (16ppm, +P) or without P (0 ppm, -P) under controlled environmental conditions. Following protein quantification using the Bradford method, and quality check using 1D SDS-PAGE, trypsin was used for in-solution digestion and Nano ACQUITY UPLC-MS/MS was used to separate and identify peptides. This study aimed at deciphering the molecular aspect of Pup1 QTL in P-starvation stress tolerance in rice.

### Sample Protocol
Shoot and root tissues were collected from 45-day-old (at tillering/vegetative stage) plants grown under +P and –P conditions, fast frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at –80℃ for protein extraction. Total proteins were extracted from three biological replicates (1 g each) of the frogen shoot and root tissues using trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation method. Briefly, the tissues were ground into a fine powder using liquid nitrogen and homogenized in 5 ml of extraction buffer (30% sucrose, 2% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8) containing 5% β-mercaptoethanol, 1 mM PMSF and phenyl isothiocyanate (C7H5NS). An equal volume of Tris-buffered phenol was added to the homogenate and placed on a gel-rocker for 30 min at room temperature (RT). The content was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 ºC and the supernatant was used to precipitate the proteins using ice-cold ammonium acetate/methanol (100 mM) solution at –20 ºC overnight. A white fluffy protein pellet obtained after centrifugation at 13000 rpm (10 min at 4 ºC) was washed three times with 0.5 mL cold acetone by incubating at –20 ºC for 10 min and centrifugation at 13000 rpm. The pellet was air-dried and dissolved in Tris buffer. Protein content in the test samples was estimated by the Bradford method. The quality of extracted protein was checked by loading an equal amount of proteins on 10% SDS-PAGE. The gel was silver-stained (Sigma, USA) to visualize protein bands and the gel was scanned with Epson Expression 11000XL Scanner (Epson, Japan). A protein sample (100 ug) diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 was used for trypsin digestion. Trypsin protein digestion (1:100, enzyme: protein, Sigma, USA) was performed following the manufacturer’s instructions by incubating overnight at 37 ºC. The sample proteins were treated with DTT (100 mM) for 1 h at 95 ºC then with IDA (250 mM) at room temperature in dark for 45 min. The digested proteins were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and incubated for 45 min at 37 ºC. After centrifugation at 10000 g for 10 min at 4 ºC, the supernatant was collected in a fresh tube. The resulting peptides were vacuum dried (45 ºC for 6 h at 800 Pa) using a Speed Vac concentrator (Basic Concentrator, Eppendorf, Germany) and suspended in 50 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water. Liquid chromatography of the protein samples was performed on a Nano ACQUITY UPLC system (ultra-performance liquid chromatography, Waters, UK). An injection volume of 10 µL was fed into the C18 column (75 µm ×150 cm × 1.7 µm) for the separation of peptides. Three runs for each sample were carried out for the separation using a gradient elution program with mobile phase A [0.1% formic acid (v/v) in water] and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Mass spectrometric detection of the peptides was performed using SYNAPT® G2 Q-TOF (Waters, UK) equipped with Nano-Electrospray Ionization (ESI) detector, and analysis was conducted in positive mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained for the +P and –P protein samples were processed using MassLynx 4.1 WATERS ver3.0.2 software [Protein Lynx Global Server (PLGS) Waters, USA] for the identification of protein by matching the individual peptide MS/MS data with the rice protein database downloaded from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/). Three runs of each sample were carried out using the search parameters: peptide tolerance 50 ppm; fragment tolerance 100 ppm; minimum no. of fragment matches for peptides 2; minimum no. of fragment matches for proteins 5; minimum no. of peptide matches for proteins 2; missed cleavages 1; modification- caramidomethyl (C), Oxidation (M), database UniportPort; default false discovery rate (FDR) 4%; search engine PLGS-Waters

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorus-starvation stress, Label-free quantification, Proteome analysis, Rice

### Affiliations
ICAI-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, India
Indian Agricultural Research Institute

### Submitter
Suresh Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Suresh Kumar
ICAI-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, India


