### Accession
PXD020732

### Title
Lysine acetylation of F-actin decreases tropomyosin-based inhibition of actomyosin activity

### Description
Actin was acetylated on lysine residues with acetic anhydride to determine its impaction on the contractile properties of the thin filaments including, actin's ability to undergo crossbridge cycling with myosin, actin's affinity for tropomyosin, and the impact of actin acetylation on calcium regulated thin filament activation

### Sample Protocol
Sample peptide preparation: 48 µl of 1 mg/ml F-actin (25 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 25 mM imidazole pH 7.2, 10 mM DTT, 1 mM ATP) were aliquoted into two separate tubes. Each tube was mixed with either 100% acetonitrile or acetonitrile containing 1:140 (v/v) diluted stock acetic anhydride (Sigma-Aldrich) via addition of four, 0.3 µl aliquots every 3 min under constant mixing. Total moles of acetic anhydride added to the latter mixture was four times the number of actin lysines.  Samples were dried down, redissolved in 50µl of 20 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate pH 8.0, then reduced with 5µl 50 mM  DTT at 55°C for 1 hour and alkylated with 5 ul 50mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 15 minutes.  Enzymatic cleavage was performed with MS-grade trypsin/lys-C (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted with stage tips constructed from Empore C18 material (3M Corporation).

### Data Protocol
Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry.  Tryptic peptides were subjected to nano-reversed phase high-pressure liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Chromatography was conducted on a 75 µm x 250 mm column that was packed in-house into a picofrit self-pack (New Objective) with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ (3 µm particles, 120Å pores; Dr. Maisch, GmbH) and eluted with a 120-min linear two-solvent gradient (solvent A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA; Suprapur, EMD Millipore) with in-house deionized, reverse-osmosed water; solvent B: 0.1% FA in 80% (v/v) Acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific) into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with the Easy-IC (internal calibration; Thermo Scientific) option. Data-dependent MS/MS acquisition was employed using a 3 s cycle time between MS scans. The resolution was 120,000 for MS and 30,000 for MS/MS.  Signal targets were 2 x 106 ions in 60 s for MS and 5 x 104 ions in 54 s for MS/MS.   MS Data Analysis. Acquired masses were searched against the RefSeq83 Oryctolagus cuniculus database using Mascot v2.6.2 (Matrix Science), as implemented in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) with lysine acetylation (+42 Da), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+1 Da), and oxidation of methionine (+16 Da) included as variable search parameters. Carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57 Da) was set as a static search parameter.  The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, while 0.02 Da was used for MS/MS.  Three missed cleavages were permitted.  Data from Proteome Discoverer (1% FDR) were imported into Scaffold Q+ v4.1.0 (Proteome Software) for conversion to mzIdentML and subsequent data inspection in Scaffold PTM v3.3.0 (Proteome Software). Lysine acetylation site confidence was assessed using Scaffold PTM’s implementation of the A-Score (Beausoleil et al.1)   1. Beausoleil SA, Villen J, Gerber SA, Rush J and Gygi SP. A probability-based approach for high-throughput protein phosphorylation analysis and site localization. Nature Biotechnology. 2006;24:1285-1292. Acknowledgments: MS on acetylated actin was conducted by the JHU Mass Spectrometry Facility, for which we thank Robert O’Meally and Dr. Robert N. Cole.

### Publication Abstract
Recent proteomics studies of vertebrate striated muscle have identified lysine acetylation at several sites on actin. Acetylation is a reversible post-translational modification that neutralizes lysine's positive charge. Positively charged residues on actin, particularly Lys<sup>326</sup> and Lys<sup>328</sup>, are predicted to form critical electrostatic interactions with tropomyosin (Tpm) that promote its binding to filamentous (F)-actin and bias Tpm to an azimuthal location where it impedes myosin attachment. The troponin (Tn) complex also influences Tpm's position along F-actin as a function of Ca<sup>2+</sup> to regulate exposure of myosin-binding sites and, thus, myosin cross-bridge recruitment and force production. Interestingly, Lys<sup>326</sup> and Lys<sup>328</sup> are among the documented acetylated residues. Using an acetic anhydride-based labeling approach, we showed that excessive, nonspecific actin acetylation did not disrupt characteristic F-actin-Tpm binding. However, it significantly reduced Tpm-mediated inhibition of myosin attachment, as reflected by increased F-actin-Tpm motility that persisted in the presence of Tn and submaximal Ca<sup>2+</sup> Furthermore, decreasing the extent of chemical acetylation, to presumptively target highly reactive Lys<sup>326</sup> and Lys<sup>328</sup>, also resulted in less inhibited F-actin-Tpm, implying that modifying only these residues influences Tpm's location and, potentially, thin filament regulation. To unequivocally determine the residue-specific consequences of acetylation on Tn-Tpm-based regulation of actomyosin activity, we assessed the effects of K326Q and K328Q acetyl (Ac)-mimetic actin on Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent, <i>in vitro</i> motility parameters of reconstituted thin filaments (RTFs). Incorporation of K328Q actin significantly enhanced Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensitivity of RTF activation relative to control. Together, our findings suggest that actin acetylation, especially Lys<sup>328</sup>, modulates muscle contraction via disrupting inhibitory Tpm positioning.

### Keywords
Thin filament, Actin, Tropomyosin, In vitro motility, Myosin, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Division of Cardiology
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
D. Brian Foster

### Lab Head
Dr Brian Foster
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Division of Cardiology


