### Accession
PXD026720

### Title
Identification of CDK9 targets using DRB and quantitative phosphoproteomics

### Description
CDK9 is a critical kinase required for the productive transcription of protein-coding genes by RNA polymerase II (pol II) in higher eukaryotes. Phosphorylation of targets including the elongation factor SPT5 and the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA pol II allow the polymerase to pass an early elongation checkpoint (EEC), which is encountered soon after initiation. In addition to halting RNA polymerase II at the EEC, CDK9 inhibition also causes premature termination of transcription across the last exon, loss of polyadenylation factors from chromatin, and loss of polyadenylation of nascent transcripts. Inhibition of the phosphatase PP2A abrogates the premature termination and loss of polyadenylation caused by CDK9 inhibition, suggesting that CDK9 and PP2A, working together, regulate the coupling of elongation and transcription termination to RNA maturation.   Our phosphoproteomic analyses, using either DRB or an analog-sensitive CDK9 cell line confirm the splicing factor SF3B1 as an additional key target of this kinase. CDK9 inhibition causes loss of interaction of splicing and export factors with SF3B1, suggesting that CDK9 also helps to co-ordinates coupling of splicing and export to transcription.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC phosphoproteomics SILAC phosphoproteomics was performed as previously described (Poss et al. 2016). For stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), Hela cells were grown in DMEM media for SILAC (minus L-Lysine and L-Arginine, Fisher Scientific) and with SILAC dialysed Foetal Bovine Serum (Dundee Cell Products). The medium was supplemented with either Arg10 (33.6 mg/ml) and Lys8 (73 mg/ml) or Arg0 and Lys0 for heavy and light treatment, respectively. After six passages at 1:3 ratio, SILAC incorporation test in HeLa cells was validated by mass spectrometry analysis.  Cells were passaged 7-8 times in SILAC media on 15 cm dishes. For each replicate, approximately 20 mg total protein was harvested for analysis after treatment with either DMSO or DRB for 30 minutes (first replicate: heavy cells DRB; light cells: DMSO; second replicate: heavy cells DMSO; light cells: DRB). After removing the media, each dish was scraped in 750 µl 95°C SDT (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.9, 10 mM TCEP) buffer with subsequent heating at 95°C for 10 minutes. Lysates were sonicated for two minutes each. Protein concentrations were determined using a Bradford assay and samples were mixed 1:1 based on total protein concentrations. FASP was carried out in two 10 kDa MWCO filters with a 50 mM iodoacetamide alkylation step and proteins were digested in 2M urea with 2% wt/wt Lys-C (Wako) for 6 h and 2% modified trypsin (Promega) for 12 h at 37°C. FASP eluates were acidified and desalted on Oasis HLB extraction cartridges.   TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment, ERLIC Chromatography, and LC-MS/MS Protocols were carried out as described (Stuart et al. 2015). An Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher) was used for quantitative proteome analysis while an Orbitrap LTQ (Thermo Fisher) was used for phosphoproteomics. The samples were run on a 60 mins gradient / 10 HCD method.

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry files for phosphoproteomics and quantitative proteomics were searched using the MaxQuant (v1.5.0.35) software package. Duplicate proteomic and phosphoproteomic were searched individually against the Uniprot human proteome database (downloaded on 16/01/2013) using the following MaxQuant parameters: multiplicity was set to 2 (heavy/light) with Arg10 and Lys8 selected, LysC/P was selected as an additional enzyme, “re-quantify” was unchecked, and Phospho (STY) was selected as a variable modification in both runs.  For phosphosite analysis, the Phospho (STY) table was processed with Perseus (v1.6.2.3) using the following workflow: reverse and contaminant reads were removed, the site table was expanded to accommodate differentially phosphorylated peptides, and rows without any quantification were removed after site table expansion. Normalized heavy to light ratios were log2 transformed for statistical analyses. Differential abundance of peptides following DRB treatment was estimated by t-tests with Welch correction, two sided, unpaired.

### Publication Abstract
CDK9 is a kinase critical for the productive transcription of protein-coding genes by RNA polymerase II (pol II). As part of P-TEFb, CDK9 phosphorylates the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of pol II and elongation factors, which allows pol II to elongate past the early elongation checkpoint (EEC) encountered soon after initiation. We show that, in addition to halting pol II at the EEC, loss of CDK9 activity causes premature termination of transcription across the last exon, loss of polyadenylation factors from chromatin, and loss of polyadenylation of nascent transcripts. Inhibition of the phosphatase PP2A abrogates the premature termination and loss of polyadenylation caused by CDK9 inhibition, indicating that this kinase/phosphatase pair regulates transcription elongation and RNA processing at the end of protein-coding genes. We also confirm the splicing factor SF3B1 as a target of CDK9 and show that SF3B1 in complex with polyadenylation factors is lost from chromatin after CDK9 inhibition. These results emphasize the important roles that CDK9 plays in coupling transcription elongation and termination to RNA maturation downstream of the EEC.

### Keywords
Hela, Cdk9, Phosphoproteomics, Drb, Silac

### Affiliations
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford,Oxford, UK
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

### Submitter
Michael Tellier

### Lab Head
Dr Shona Murphy
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford,Oxford, UK


