### Accession
PXD006851

### Title
Lactobacillus mucosae LM1 and intestinal cell interaction

### Description
In this study, we employed a gel-free proteomic approach to investigate proteome changes in both LM1 and IPEC-J2 cells after co-incubation. QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometry (MS) was used for a full proteomic scan of bacterial and intestinal cells, and for a large-scale quantitative analysis of protein dynamics during host-microbe interaction. This is the first proteomic study to use this method to obtain novel insights into probiotic adhesion to IECs.

### Sample Protocol
Control (pure cultures of LM1 and IPEC-J2 cells) protein extracts were prepared as previously described (8, 17). For the co-culture (mixed culture) experiment, the bacterial cells were first harvested. To do this, the bacterial cells were aspirated from the setup, washed twice with DPBS, and then centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. The IPEC-J2 cells were then detached from the polystyrene 6-well plates with 0.05% trypsin-EDTA (Gibco, USA), followed by trypsin deactivation using DMEM/F12. The detached IPEC-J2 cells then underwent differential centrifugation at 2500 g for 3 min. After discarding the medium, the collected cells were re-suspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail and lysed by sonication. The samples were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min and the supernatants were collected. The protein concentrations were measured by Bradford protein assay. The protein solutions were stored at –20°C until further analysis. The quantified protein samples were analyzed for a full MS scan followed by independent analysis (IDA) MS/MS scans using a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a heated electrospray ionization source (HESI-II). MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 within a mass range of 350–1,800 m/z. Ion accumulation was set at a maximum injection time of 100 ms. After ion activation/dissociation, the 10 most abundant peaks (Top10 method) were measured with higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 27% within a mass range of 100-2000 m/z. Sample fractionation was performed in solvent A (water/acetonitrile, 98:2 v/v; 0.1% formic acid). Samples were trapped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) in a Dionex U 3000 RSLCnano high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system followed by washing with 98% solvent A for 6 min at a flow rate of 4 or 6 μL/min. The Acclaim PepMap 100 capillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) facilitated the protein separation at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. After LC, the analytical gradient was run with various percentages of solvent B in the following manner: (1) 2.0 to 35% for 90 min, (2) 35 to 95% for 10 min, (3) 90% for 5 min, and (4) 5.0% for 15 min. The resulting peptides were electro-sprayed through a coated silica tip (PicoTip emitter, New Objective) at an ion spray voltage of 2000 eV.

### Data Protocol
All raw data files generated by MS were processed in Xcalibur Qual Browser and analyzed by Proteome Discoverer software 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and the Maxquant program (Max Plank Institute, Germany) against the genomes of L. mucosae LM1 (Genbank accession number: NZ_CP011013.1) and Sus scrofa (GenBank accession number: GCA_000003025.4). The protein sequences were downloaded from the NCBI reference sequences (RefSeq) database. All of the biological functions of the proteins from LM1 and IPEC-J2 were classified based on the most recent genome available in the NCBI database. The quantification was also performed using Proteome Discoverer software 1.4 and the Maxquant program (Max Plank Institute, Germany), which can automatically calculate the relative abundance of peptides and the corresponding proteins. Proteins identified with two or more unique peptides were considered high confidence identifications and were used for quantification. Also, to ensure the accuracy of quantification, only proteins that had a coefficient of variation of four biological repeats of less than 20% were identified as significantly expressed proteins. In addition, falsely identified proteins were filtered from the proteome data at a 5% false-discovery rate (FDR) threshold.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Lactobacilli</i> are bacteria that are beneficial to host health, but information on communication between <i>Lactobacilli</i> and host cells in the intestine is lacking. In this study, we examined the proteomes of the <i>Lactobacillus mucosae</i> strain LM1, as a model of beneficial bacteria, and the intestinal porcine epithelial cell line (IPEC-J2) after co-culture. Label-free proteomics demonstrated the high-throughput capability of the technique, and robust characterization of the functional profiles and changes in the bacteria and intestinal cells was achieved in pure and mixed cultures. After co-culture, we identified totals of 376 and 653 differentially expressed proteins in the LM1 and IPEC-J2 proteomes, respectively. The major proteomic changes in the LM1 strain occurred in the functional categories of transcription, general function, and translation, whereas those in IPEC-J2 cells involved metabolic and cellular processes, and cellular component organization/biogenesis. Among them, elongation factor Tu, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and phosphocarrier protein HPr, which are known to be involved in bacterial adhesion, were upregulated in LM1. In contrast, proteins involved in tight junction assembly, actin organization, and genetic information processing (i.e., histones and signaling pathways) were significantly upregulated in IPEC-J2 cells. Furthermore, we identified functional pathways that are possibly involved in host-microbe crosstalk and response. These findings will provide novel insights into host-bacteria communication and the molecular mechanism of probiotic establishment in the intestine.

### Keywords
Ipec-j2, Host-microbe interaction, Label-free proteomics, Lactobacillus

### Affiliations
Florida A&M University
Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology, Department of Animal Resources Science, Dankook University

### Submitter
Edward Pajarillo

### Lab Head
Dr Dae-Kyung Kang
Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology, Department of Animal Resources Science, Dankook University


