### Accession
PXD008500

### Title
Ranking the contribution of ankylosing spondylitis-associated ERAP1 polymorphisms to shaping the HLA-B*27 peptidome

### Description
The Endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase I (ERAP1) trims peptides to their optimal size for binding to Major Histocompatibility Complex class I proteins. The natural polymorphism of this enzyme is associated with ankylosing spondylitis (AS) in epistasis with the major risk factor for this disease, HLA-B*27, suggesting a direct relationship between AS and HLA-B*27-bound peptides. Three polymorphisms that affect peptide trimming protect from AS: K528R, D575N/R725Q, and Q730E. We characterized and ranked the effects of each mutation, and their various combinations, by quantitative comparisons of the HLA-B*27 peptidomes from cells expressing distinct ERAP1 variants. Five features were examined: peptide length, N-terminal flanking residues, N-terminal residues of the natural ligands, internal sequences and affinity for B*27:05. Polymorphism at residue 528 showed the largest influence, affecting all five features regardless of peptide length. D575N/R725Q showed a much smaller effect. Yet, when co-occurring with K528R, it added to this latter change in decreasing ERAP1 activity. Polymorphism at residue 730 showed a significant influence on peptide length, reflecting differential trimming of nonamers and longer peptides. Accordingly, multiple features were affected by the Q730E mutation in a length-dependent way. The alterations induced in the B*27:05 peptidome by natural ERAP1 variants with different K528R/Q730E combinations reflected separate and additive effects of both mutations. Thus, the influence of ERAP1 on HLA-B*27 is very diverse at the population level, due to the multiplicity and complexity of ERAP1 variants, and to the distinct effects of their co-occurring polymorphisms, leading to significant modulation of disease risk among HLA-B*27-positive individuals.

### Sample Protocol
About 1x109 cells were lysed at 4ºC in 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Igepal CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich) and a mixture of protease inhibitors (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). After centrifugation, the supernatant was passed through a column containing the ME1 mAb bound to CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK) and washed with 20 column volumes each of 20 mM Tris-HCl,  pH 8.0 containing: 1) 150 mM NaCl, 2) 400 mM NaCl, 3) 150 mM NaCl, and 4) 40 column volumes of buffer without NaCl. Peptides were eluted with 1% TFA (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature, filtered through Vivaspin 2, cutoff 5,000 Da (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Gottingen, Germany), concentrated in a SpeedVac and subjected to reversed phase purification using OMIX tips (Varian Inc. Palo Alto, CA) by elution with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA in water. The eluted peptides were dried and stored at −20°C. For each LCL, three preparations were independently obtained from the same cell amounts.   Mass spectrometry. The recovered peptides were analyzed in a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer fitted with Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanocapillary UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The peptides were resolved on a capillary column (75 μm ID and  ≈20 cm long) pressure packed as in (38) with C18 reversed-phase 3.5 μm beads (Reprosil-C18-Aqua, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany),  using a 7-28% acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% formic acid during 180 min followed by 28-95%  during 15 min. The flow rate was 0.15 µL/min. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 sec and the automatic gain control value for the full MS was set to 3x106. The selected masses were fragmented from the survey scan of mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 300-1,800 AMU at resolution 70,000. Data was acquired using a data-dependent "top-10" method, fragmenting the peptides by higher-energy collisional dissociation. MS/MS spectra were acquired starting at m/z 200 with a resolution of 17,500. The target value of the MS/MS was set to 1x105 and the isolation window to 1.8 m/z. The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms and normalized collision energy to 25 eV. No fragmentation was performed for peptides with unassigned precursor ion charge states or charge states of four and above. The peptide match option was set to Preferred. Fragmented masses were dynamically excluded from further selection for fragmentation for 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
. HLA-B*27-bound peptides were isolated from three independent preparations of each of the four LCL used in this study, to provide for biological replicates. About 1x109 cells were used for each preparation. The peptides were fragmented by mass spectrometry, as detailed above, and the peptide sequences were assigned, from the MS/MS spectra, using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.25) (39) with the Andromeda search engine (40) and the human UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 2015_07, 20197 entries) under the following  parameters: precursor ion mass and fragment mass tolerance 20 ppm, false discovery rate (FDR) 0.01 and peptide-spectrum matching FDR 0.05. N-terminal acetylation, Gln-to-pyroglutamic cyclation and Met oxidation were included as variable modifications. Identifications derived from the reverse database and known contaminants were eliminated. Peptides in the length range of 8 to 14 amino acid residues, corresponding to the overwhelming majority of MHC-I ligands, with Arg or Gln at peptide position (P) 2, which is the major anchor motif of HLA-B*27, were assigned as B*27:05 ligands.

### Publication Abstract
The Endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase I (ERAP1) trims peptides to their optimal size for binding to Major Histocompatibility Complex class I proteins. The natural polymorphism of this enzyme is associated with ankylosing spondylitis (AS) in epistasis with the major risk factor for this disease, HLA-B*27, suggesting a direct relationship between AS and HLA-B*27-bound peptides. Three polymorphisms that affect peptide trimming protect from AS: K528R, D575N/R725Q, and Q730E. We characterized and ranked the effects of each mutation, and their various combinations, by quantitative comparisons of the HLA-B*27 peptidomes from cells expressing distinct ERAP1 variants. Five features were examined: peptide length, N-terminal flanking residues, N-terminal residues of the natural ligands, internal sequences and affinity for B*27:05. Polymorphism at residue 528 showed the largest influence, affecting all five features regardless of peptide length. D575N/R725Q showed a much smaller effect. Yet, when co-occurring with K528R, it further decreased ERAP1 activity. Polymorphism at residue 730 showed a significant influence on peptide length, because of distinct effects on trimming of nonamers compared with longer peptides. Accordingly, multiple features were affected by the Q730E mutation in a length-dependent way. The alterations induced in the B*27:05 peptidome by natural ERAP1 variants with different K528R/Q730E combinations reflected separate and additive effects of both mutations. Thus, the influence of ERAP1 on HLA-B*27 is very diverse at the population level, because of the multiplicity and complexity of ERAP1 variants, and to the distinct effects of their co-occurring polymorphisms, leading to significant modulation of disease risk among HLA-B*27-positive individuals.

### Keywords
Human, Immunopeptidome, Lc-ms/ms, Mhc, Hla, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Biology
Technion, Israel institute of technology

### Submitter
Arie Admon

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Technion, Israel institute of technology


