### Accession
PXD007159

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of affinity purified yeast NMD complexes

### Description
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a major translation-dependent RNA degradation pathway required for embryo development and telomere maintenance. Core NMD factors Upf1, Upf2 and Upf3 are conserved from yeast to mammals but a model of the NMD machinery compatible with all eukaryotes is not yet available. We performed the first large-scale quantitative characterization of yeast NMD complexes through affinity purification and mass-spectrometry with 7 different NMD-related factors, with or without Rnase, in strains deleted or not for NMD genes. This extensive characterization of NMD complexes identified two distinct complexes associated with Upf1: Detector (Upf1/2/3) and Effector. Effector contained, in addition to Upf1, the mRNA decapping enzyme and two potential equivalents of mammalian Smg6/5/7: Nmd4 and Ebs1. Like the Smg proteins, Nmd4 and Ebs1 were required for efficient NMD. Our results suggest that the core eukaryotic NMD machinery is conserved across species and operates through successive Upf1-bound Detector and Effector complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were treated with Endoprotease Lys-C and Trypsin (Trypsin Gold Mass Spec Grade; Promega). Peptide samples were desalted by OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies) and then analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Raw mass spectrometry (MS) data from the LTQ-Orbitrap were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1. Only protein identifications based on a minimum of two peptides were selected for further quantitative studies. The protocol has been previously described in Defenouillere et al., "Cdc48-associated complex bound to 60S particles is required for the clearance of aberrant translation products", PNAS vol 110 no 13, p 5046-5051, 2013.

### Data Protocol
Peptide intensity values, as reported by MaxQuant in the "peptides.txt" file were the basis for the label-free analyses with a minimum of two different peptides for each identification. R scripts were used to calculate a score called LTOP2 for each protein group. This score is similar with the "top three" average described by Silva, Gorenstein et al. (Molecular and Cellular Proteomics, 2006), with several differences. First, we built meta-peptide intensities, base on the intensity of overlapping peptides with missed cleavages. Next, we took the top three or the top 2, if only two peptide intensities were available, and calculated the average of log2 transformed values. Calculated LTOP2 values on whole cell extracts were in excellent agreement with previous estimates of protein abundance in yeast.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tap, Yeast, Maxquant, Ltq-orbitrap velos, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
Genetics of Macromolecular Interactions Genomes and Genetics Department 25-28 rue du docteur Roux 75015 Paris, FRANCE

### Submitter
Cosmin Saveanu

### Lab Head
Dr Alain Jacquier
Genetics of Macromolecular Interactions Genomes and Genetics Department 25-28 rue du docteur Roux 75015 Paris, FRANCE


