### Accession
PXD005141

### Title
Loss-less nano-fractionator for high sensitivity, high coverage proteomics

### Description
Recent advances in mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics now allow very deep coverage of cellular proteomes. To achieve near-comprehensive identification and quantification, the combination of a first HPLC-based peptide fractionation orthogonal to the online LC-MS/MS step has proven to be particularly powerful. This first dimension is typically performed with mL/min-flow and relatively large column inner diameters, which allows efficient pre-fractionation but typically requires peptide amounts in the mg range. Here we describe a novel approach termed ‘spider fractionator’ in which the post-column flow of a nanobore chromatography system enters an eight-port flow-selector rotor valve. The valve switches the flow into different flow channels at constant time intervals, such as every 90 s. Each flow channel collects the fractions into autosampler vials of the LC-MS/MS system. Employing a freely configurable collection mechanism, samples are concatenated in a loss-less manner into 2 to 96 fractions, with efficient peak separation. The combination of eight fractions with 100 min gradients yields very deep coverage at reasonable measurement time, and other parameters can be chosen for even more rapid or for extremely deep measurements. We demonstrate excellent sensitivity by decreasing sample amounts from 100 μg into the sub-μg range, without losses attributable to the spider fractionator and while quantifying close to 10,000 proteins. Finally, we apply the system to the rapid, automated and in-depth characterization of 12 different human cell lines to a median depth of 11,300 different proteins, which revealed differences recapitulating their developmental origin and differentiation status. The fractionation technology described here is flexible, easy to use and facilitates comprehensive proteome characterization with minimal sample requirements.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was performed as described previously (3) with the following adaptions. 300 μg cells were suspended in 50 μL of SDC reduction and alkylation buffer (3). The cells were kept at 95°C for 5 min to denature proteins and afterwards 4 sonicated to shear DNA and enhance cell disruption with a water-bath sonicator (Bioruptor, model UCD-200, Diagenode) for 15 min at the maximum level. The proteolytic enzymes LysC and trypsin were added in a 1:100 ratio (micrograms of enzyme to micrograms of protein) and the solution was incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. Peptides were acidified by adding 100 μL ethylacetate/1% TFA and extensive mixing for 2 min and 20 μg were transferred into StageTips containing two 14-gauge plugs. Afterwards the StageTips were washed with 100 μL ethylacetate/1% TFA to strip SDC and lipids from the digested cells. This was followed by a wash step with 100 μL ddH2O/0.2% TFA. The purified peptides were eluted with 60 μL 80% acetonitrile/19% ddH2O/1% ammonia in autosampler vials. For all steps the StageTips were centrifuged at 2,000 g until the solutions were rinsed through completely. The collected material was dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 60°C (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Peptides were suspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA in ddH2O and sonicated for 15 min in a water-bath sonicator (Branson Ultrasonics, Ultrasonic Cleaner Model 2510). Moreover, 6,600 HeLa cells, the equivalent to 1 μg of starting material (29), were separately digested using the in-StageTip protocol (3) with the above mentioned adaptions.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.31 (35) and peptide lists were searched by the Andromeda search engine (36) against the human Uniprot FASTA database to which common contaminant proteins had been added (86,746 entries) with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for both proteins and peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids and was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme 7 specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification were performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. The MaxQuant feature ‘match between runs’ was enabled within the dataset of the pooled eight fractions and the single shot samples for all cell line samples. Proteins matching to the reversed database were filtered out. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done with a minimum ratio count of 1 (37). All bioinformatics analyses were performed within the Perseus software of the MaxQuant computational platform (35, 37).

### Publication Abstract
Recent advances in mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics now allow very deep coverage of cellular proteomes. To achieve near-comprehensive identification and quantification, the combination of a first HPLC-based peptide fractionation orthogonal to the on-line LC-MS/MS step has proven to be particularly powerful. This first dimension is typically performed with milliliter/min flow and relatively large column inner diameters, which allow efficient pre-fractionation but typically require peptide amounts in the milligram range. Here, we describe a novel approach termed "spider fractionator" in which the post-column flow of a nanobore chromatography system enters an eight-port flow-selector rotor valve. The valve switches the flow into different flow channels at constant time intervals, such as every 90 s. Each flow channel collects the fractions into autosampler vials of the LC-MS/MS system. Employing a freely configurable collection mechanism, samples are concatenated in a loss-less manner into 2-96 fractions, with efficient peak separation. The combination of eight fractions with 100 min gradients yields very deep coverage at reasonable measurement time, and other parameters can be chosen for even more rapid or for extremely deep measurements. We demonstrate excellent sensitivity by decreasing sample amounts from 100 &#x3bc;g into the sub-microgram range, without losses attributable to the spider fractionator and while quantifying close to 10,000 proteins. Finally, we apply the system to the rapid automated and in-depth characterization of 12 different human cell lines to a median depth of 11,472 different proteins, which revealed differences recapitulating their developmental origin and differentiation status. The fractionation technology described here is flexible, easy to use, and facilitates comprehensive proteome characterization with minimal sample requirements.

### Keywords
Fractionation, Cell lines, Nano-flow

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Martinsried
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Martinsried


