### Accession
PXD024680

### Title
Activity of the mouse Notch ligand DLL1 is sensitive to C-terminal tagging in vivo

### Description
Objective DLL1 is a mammalian Notch ligand with essential functions during embryonic development. We tagged endogenous DLL1 in one homologous recombination step such that AcGFP-HA tagged DLL1 could be converted by Cre-mediated site-specific recombination into StrepFlag tagged DLL1. We anticipated that this should allow us to visualise DLL1 in living cells as well as allow for sorting and enrichment of DLL1-expressing cells and efficient purification of DLL1 protein complex.  Results We generated constructs to express a DLL1 variant that carried C-terminal in frame an AcGFPHA tag flanked by loxP sites followed by a StrepFlag tag out of frame. Cre-mediated recombination removed AcGFP-HA and added StrepFlag in frame to DLL1. The AcGFPHAstopStrepFlag tag was added to the Dll1 cDNA to allow for tests in cultured cells in vitro and was introduced into endogenous DLL1 in mice using ES cells modified by homologous recombination. Tagged DLL1 protein was detected by antibodies against GFP and HA or Flag, respectively, both in CHO cell and embryo lysates. In CHO cells the AcGFP protein fused to DLL1 was functional. In vivo AcGFP expression was below the level of detection by direct fluorescence. However, the StrepFlag tag allowed us to specifically purify DLL1 complexes from embryo lysates. Homozygous mice expressing AcGFPHA or StrepFlag-tagged DLL1 revealed a vertebral column phenotype reminiscent of disturbances in AP polarity during somitogenesis, a process most sensitive to reduced DLL1 function. Thus, even small C-terminal tags can impinge on sensitive developmental processes requiring DLL1 activity.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification of DLL1 complexes from DLL1-StrepFlag embryos and Mass spectrometry Lysates of d10,5 embryos homozygous for the DLL1StrepFlag tag (Tg/Tg) and wild type (wt) as controls were used to purify tagged DLL1 complexes for  mass spectrometry in six independent experiments. Embryos (exp 1-6: Tg/Tg 29e, 42e,71e,84e,94e,135e and wt 34e, 109e, 117e,96e,113e,104e) were lysed in lysisbuffer (30mM Tris/HCl pH7.5,150mM NaCl, 0,5% Nonidet P40) 1-3 hours on ice. Embryo tissue was dissociated by pipetting up and down and lysates were centrifuged for 30 min at 13000rpm (Eppendorf) at 4°C. Supernatants were added to washed  Anti-Flag M2 Affinity gel beads (Sigma) (1 µl per embryo) and put onto an Illustra Microspin Column (GE Healthcare),  incubated over night, then washed 3 times with about 500 µl washing buffer (30mM Tris/HCl pH7.5,150mM NaCl, 0,1% Nonidet P4) by flow through. Bound  proteins were eluted with 200ng/µl Flag peptide (Sigma F3290) using about 2µl of Flag peptide solution/embryo. COmplete Tablets Roche plus Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 (Sigma) plus Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 3 (Sigma) 1:100 were used as protease inhibitors added to the lysis and washing buffer. The eluates were subjected to a methanol-chloroform precipitation followed by tryptic cleavage as described before (Gloeckner et al, 2009). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on Ultimate3000 RSLCnano systems (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected automatically and loaded at a flow rate of 10 μl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water onto a nano trap column (Thermo Scientific; Orbitrap Fusion: 2 mm x 10 mm, µPAC Trapping column, 300 nm, 100-200 Å, PharmaFluidics). After 3 min, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (315 µm x 50cm, µPACTM nano-LC columns – 50cm µPACTM C18, 300 nm, 100-200 Å, PharmaFluidics) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 95 min. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B in 5 minutes. From the high-resolution MS pre-scan with a mass range of 335 to 1500. The Orbitrap Fusion was run in top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to a value of 30 and the resulting fragments were detected in the ion trap. The lock mass option was activated; the background signal with a mass of 445.12003 was used as lock mass (Olsen et al, 2005). Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 20 s by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.09; https://maxquant.net/) (Cox & Mann, 2008; Cox et al, 2009). As a digesting enzyme, Trypsin/P was selected with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The data were analyzed by label-free quantification with the minimum ratio count of 2. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 4.5 ppm and the re-quantify option was selected. For peptide and protein identification, the following subset of the SwissProt database was used: mouse release 2019_08, #17,027 entries, contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 2 and a minimum length of 7 amino acids were tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run options was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The statistical analysis was done using the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3; https://maxquant.net/perseus/) (Tyanova et al, 2016). A minimum of 6 biological replicates were used for statistics. Potential contaminants, peptides only identified by side or reverse sequence were removed. Minimum half of the samples must have valid values. Based on the median value, significance A (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR) was calculated. The stability of protein ratios within groups was determined using the student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endogenous tagging, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Medical Bioanalytics
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 5-7 D-72076 Tübingen

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 5-7 D-72076 Tübingen


