### Accession
PXD005945

### Title
Deep LC-MS/MS analysis of the proteome from six cell lines

### Description
Mass spectrometry is a rational orthogonal method for antibody-based assays, but implementation of MS in the validation pipeline of antibody manufacturers is hampered by the high cost and low throughput. Here we present a rapid method for antibody validation based on denaturing gel electrophoresis of biotinylated cell lysates (PAGE) followed by mass spectrometry (MS) and antibody array analysis (MAP). The first step, PAGE, produces 12 fractions containing proteins of increasing molecular weight. The fractions are analyzed in parallel by MS and MAP. Antibodies to be tested are immobilized on color coded polymer beads to create antibody arrays, which can comprise up to several thousand various antibodies. MS data provide definite protein identifications in each fraction, creating a reference for antibody reactivity patterns obtained via MAP. The method employs automated software to compare both datasets and provide validation data for each antibody tested. Due to the high-throughput nature of the assay we were able to screen several thousands of antibodies against six different cell lines. The differences in protein expression between the cell lines provide an additional control of antibody specificity. Using PAGE-MAP it is possible to screen and validate thousands of antibodies in a matter of weeks. Moreover, antibodies are tested under standardized conditions, which allows for direct comparison of their performance.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines used in this project were labeled with SILAC amino acids. U2-OS and MCF7 cells were cultured with light isotope amino acids, RT4 and HeLa cells were cultured with medium amino acids (Lysine 13C6 and Arginine 13C6), and Jurkat and A431 cells were cultured with heavy amino acids (Lysine 13C6 15N2, Arginine 15N4 D7). Total lysate obtained from Jurkat, U2-OS, HeLa, A431, RT4 and MCF7 cells was biotinylated using 0.5mg/ml of EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS and EZ-Link Maleimide-PEG2 biotin (both from ThermoFisher). Free biotin was removed by four washes in dH2O on 10 kDa Amicon Ultra spin filters. The samples were fractionated using GelFree 8100 instrument in 5, 8 and 10% gel cassettes. Prior to further processing, differentially labelled SILAC lysates were combined, with U2-OS, HeLa and Jurkat samples in one set and MCF7, RT4 and MCF7 in another set. Each GelFree fraction was subsequently bound to 15 µl streptavidin-sepharose beads and processed in a 96-well PCR plate. After overnight incubation at 4°C with the sample, the sepharose-streptavidin beads were washed with 200 µl of PBS with 1% lauryl maltoside (twice), PBS (twice) and water (three times). After the last wash, 50 µl of ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) was added to each sample and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. After the digestion, peptides were desalted and purified using Sep-Pak tC18 µElution Plates (Waters). After peptide desalting and purification samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and re-suspended in 12 µl of 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analysed on Qexactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to Easy-nLC1000 liquid chromatographer (both ThermoFisher Scientific). The LC was equipped with a 50cm PepMap RSLCC18 column with a diameter of 75µm (ThermoFisher Scientific, cat. no. ES803). Water with 0.1% formic acid was used as solvent A and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid was used as solvent B. The gradient was as follows: 2%B to 7%B in 5 min; 7%B to 30%B in 55 min; 30%B to 90%B in 2 min; 90%B for 20 min. Solvent flow was set to 300 nl/min and column temperature was kept at 60°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 400 to 1,200) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the quadruple). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense multiply-charged ions, up to ten, depending on signal intensity, for fragmentation on the HCD cell using high-energy collision dissociation at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. MS/MS scans were collected at 17,500 resolution at the Orbitrap cell. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. General mass spectrometry conditions were: electrospray voltage 2.1 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature of 250oC, normalized HCD collision energy 25%. Ion selection threshold was set to 5e4 counts. Isolation width of 3.0 Da was used.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 for protein identification. Parameters were set as follows: no fixed modification; protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. First search error window of 20 ppm and mains search error of 6 ppm. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. Minimal unique peptides were set to 1, and FDR allowed was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Match between runs options was turned on. The reviewed Uniprot human database was used (download from June 2015). Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, On-bead digestion, Page-map, Antibody validation, Gelfree

### Affiliations
Dept. of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway
K.G. Jebsen Center for Cancer Immunotherapy, Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Krzysztof Sikorski

### Lab Head
Dr Fridtjof Lund-Johansen
Dept. of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway


