### Accession
PXD017649

### Title
The Dynamic Proteome of Oligodendrocyte Lineage Differentiation Features Planar Cell Polarity and Macroautophagy Pathways

### Description
Generation of oligodendrocytes (OLs) is a sophisticated multistep process, mechanistic underpinnings of which are not fully understood and demand further investigation. To systematically profile proteome dynamics during human embryonic stem cell (hESC) differentiation into OLs, we applied in-depth quantitative proteomics at different developmental stages and monitored changes in protein abundance using a multiplexed tandem mass tag (TMT) based proteomics approach. Findings: Our proteome data provided a comprehensive protein expression profile that highlighted specific expression clusters based on the protein abundances over the course of human OL lineage differentiation. The proteome profile of OL lineage cells revealed 378 proteins that were specifically up-regulated only in one differentiation stage. In addition, comparative pairwise analysis of differentiation stages demonstrated that abundances of 352 proteins differentially changed between consecutive differentiation time points. Our results highlighted the eminence of the planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling and autophagy (particularly macroautophagy) in the progression of OL lineage differentiation

### Sample Protocol
Human embryonic stem cell (hESC) differentiation into oligodendrocyte (OL) lineage cells. Adherent RH6 cells were induced into SOX1+ NSCs by dual inhibition of SMAD signaling [155]. Under the treatment of 10 µM SB431542 (SB, inhibitor of TGF-β/activin/nodal signaling), 250 nM LDN193189 (LDN, inhibitor of bone morphogenetic protein signaling) and 100 nM all trans-retinoic acid (RA, caudalizing patterning agent) for 8 days, nearly all the differentiated cells were SOX1+ NSCs (Figure S1A, C). Next, in order to mimic the embryonic ventral spinal cord environment (pMN domain) and achieve pre-OPC, 100 nM RA and 1 µM smoothened agonist of sonic hedgehog (SAG, ventralizing patterning agent) were applied for 22 days. By day 12 of differentiation, NSCs gave rise to OLIG2+ NPCs (Figure S1D), which were then detached for sphere aggregation; this enriched the OLIG2+ population. By day 20 of differentiation, the OLIG2+ progenitors committed to the OL lineage by co-expressing NKX2.2 (pre-OPCs; Figure S1E). On day 20, supportive reagents for pre-OPCs expansion and maturation toward OPCs, and further OPCs expansion and maturation toward OL producing OPCs, i.e. 10 ng/ml platelet-derived growth factor AA (PDGF-AA), 5 ng/ml hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), 10 ng/ml insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), 10 ng/ml neurotrophin 3 (NTF3), 60 ng/ml 3,3,5-Triiodo-l-thyronine (T3, thyroid hormone) , 25 µg/ml insulin, 100ng/ml biotin, and 1µM cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) were added to the culture medium for 60 days (Figure S1A). On day 30, spherical aggregates were plated onto poly-L-ornithine/laminin-coated dishes and on day 80 PDGF+ OPCs were generated (Figure S1F). In order to eliminate the neurons and astrocytes that migrated out of the spherical aggregates and to achieve a homogenous population of OPCs, we re-plated the cells twice onto poly-L-ornithine/laminin-coated dishes, on day 65 and on day 75 of differentiation. On day 80, the growth-factors were withdrawn from the culture medium and OPCs were differentiated into MBP+ OLs in the presence of 10 mM HEPES buffer and 20 µg/ml ascorbic acid (AA, supportive for OL differentiation), in addition to T3, insulin, biotin, and cAMP (Figure S1A, G, Table S3) [6,7].

### Data Protocol
Data processing and protein identification. MS raw data were generated by Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) and processed with Proteome Discoverer V1.3 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Peptide identification was performed using a local MASCOT server V2.3 (Matrix Science, London, UK). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the reviewed UniProt Homo sapiens protein database (20,352 sequences-August 2018)[10]. The following parameters and adjustments were used: MS1 tolerance was set to ±10 ppm precursor. A limit of 0.1 Da was applied for MS/MS fragment ion tolerance and trypsin was set as cleavage specificity that allowed only one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and TMT modification of peptide N-termini plus lysine residues, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of Asn and Gln residues were set as variable modifications. For deconvolution of the high-resolution MS2 spectra, only peptides with a score >15 and below the Mascot significance threshold filter of P = 0.05 were included in the search results. Single peptide identifications required a score equal to or above the Mascot identity threshold to be incorporated in the search results. Protein grouping was enabled such that when a set of peptides in one protein were equal to, or completely contained within the set of peptides of another protein, the two proteins were confined in one protein group. Proteins with at least two unique peptides were regarded as confident identifications. Hence, search results were further filtered to retain proteins that had q values (FDR) of <1% and only master proteins assigned via the protein grouping algorithm were retained. Relative quantitation of proteins was achieved by pairwise comparison of TMT reporter ion signal to noise (S/N) ratios as the ratio S/N of the labels for each of the differentiation time points versus the labels of the internal standard (reference) of that run.  TMT data analysis. All protein ratios with respect to the reference (label-126) were extracted and a limit of 1.5 was set as the cutoff for differential expression. No limit was set for the number of counts per peptide; however, 100 × log2(ratio)/variability was set as the protein z-score. All downstream data analysis including Pearson correlation coefficients (PCCs), c-means unsupervised fuzzy clustering and visualization of the results were implemented using custom scripts in R statistical computing environment [163]. Protein classification in Figure S2C was performed using the PANTHER classification system (http://pantherdb.org/) [13]. Biological DataBase network (bioDBnet) was used for conversion of accession IDs into HGNC Symbols (protein names) (https://biodbnet-abcc.ncifcrf.gov/db/db2db.php) [164]. Normalization and differentially expression analysis were performed using the R/Bioconductor package limma version 3.34.9 [165]. Proteins having absolute log2 fold-change higher than 1 and Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value less than 0.05 were considered as significant differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in all comparisons. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed using GSEA 4.0.3 [166] with weighted enrichment statistics. The number of permutations was set to 1000. We used gene_set as the permutation type and Signal2Noise metric for ranking genes. The minimum and maximum sizes of the sets were adjusted to 15 and 500, respectively. Wnt signaling components for GSEA analysis were obtained from Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) [167]. Gene ontology (GO) and pathway analysis were performed using Enrichr (https://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/) [41,42]. Single protein indexed GOs were achieved by UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/, based on reviewed indexed data) [40], neXtProt (https://www.nextprot.org/) [93], and David gene annotation tool v6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) [39] databases.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human embryonic stem cell; neural stem cell; progenitor cell; oligodendrocyte; wnt signaling; autophagy; quantitative proteomics; multiplexed tandem mass tag

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Yunqi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Ghasem Hosseini Salekdeh
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran


