### Accession
PXD017902

### Title
Characterization of the human urine proteome in Prostate Cancer

### Description
Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the most prevalent cancers among men and the fifth leading cause of cancer-related death in men. Currently, PCa suspicion is based on abnormal digital rectal examination and/or raised PSA serum levels, with prostate needle biopsy being required for a definitive diagnosis. Histopathological classification of tumours based on GS grading, cancer staging and PSA levels are used to predict the indolent or aggressive progression of the tumour as well as the likelihood of disease recurrence. These diagnosis and prognosis tools for PCa have revealed limited usefulness, especially PSA testing, which despite organ-specificity is not cancer-specific, being associated with low specificity. In this vein, new markers have been proposed in order to increase the accuracy of PCa detection, most of them proteins. Despite the significant efforts that have been undertaken for discovering other biomarkers for PCa management, few were translated into clinical practice. The simple and non-invasive nature of urine collection along with its proteome stability and storing many secreted proteins of prostate origin, makes the identification of PCa urinary biomarkers an attractive approach. With this in mind, we aimed to compare the urinary proteome profile of PCa patients with non-cancer patients in order to identify non-invasive candidate biomarkers for PCa prediction. To fulfil this task, we followed a shotgun LC-MS/MS approach using an Orbitrap instrument. A combination of two different software packages, MaxQuant and Proteome Discover was used to increase the robustness of analysis and enhance the search for new biomarkers. Proteins quantification was based on a label-free quantification approach (false discovery rate (FDR) 1%). The present dataset was used to disclosure potential markers in PCa management.

### Sample Protocol
5 PCa patients (UT 805, UT 812, UT 815, UT 821, UT 822) and 5 healthy (AC 381, AC 384, AC 386, AC 392, AC 399) subjects were enrolled in the study. Urine samples were collected before surgical or other therapeutic interventions. From this study were excluded patients with other types of cancer, obesity or autoimmune diseases, and the control group did not present history of previous prostatic disease. After collection, urine samples were stored at 4 °C no more than 24h and centrifugated at 4,000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were stored at -80 °C and then centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 min at 10 °C and protein was concentrated using a filter device with a molecular weight cut off of 10 kDa (Vivaspin 500-10 kDa, Sartorius Biotech). Protein retentate was resuspended in 100 μL of 0,5 M Tris pH 6,8 and 4% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and protein concentration was measured using a commercial DC (detergent-compatible)TM kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California).  SDS-PAGE: The volume equivalent to 50 µg of protein was precipitated overnight with nine parts of cold acetone (-20 °C) and centrifugated at 14,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C. Then, the precipitated protein was directly resuspended in sample loading buffer (Laemmli buffer containing 20% of 2-mercaptoethanol), heated at 100 °C for 5 min, and separated on 12% Tris-Glycine SDS-PAGE gels. Following electrophoretic separation, gels were fixed in methanol: acetic acid: water (4:1:5; for 30 min) and stained with Colloidal Comassie Blue G250 (overnight). Gels were destained with 20% of methanol. In-gel digestion: The gel pieces were washed with ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) (25 mM) and acetonitrile (ACN) (VWR Chemicals). Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) (10 mM, 30 min, 60 °C) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (55 mM, 30 min, 25°C).  The gel pieces were washed once with 100 mM of NH4HCO3 and then with ACN. Gel pieces were vacuum-dried (SpeedVac, Thermo Savant) and digested by adding a sequencing grade modified trypsin (AbSCIEX, Thermo Scientific™ Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, cat #90057) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final protease: protein ratio of 1:25 (w/w).  After 30 min on ice, 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added, and the samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C. The extraction of tryptic peptides was performed by the serial addition of 10% formic acid (FA, Fluka), 10% FA/ACN (1:1) twice and 90% ACN. Tryptic peptides were lyophilized (SpeedVac, Thermo Savant) and resuspended in 1% of an FA solution upon HPLC injection.  Protein identification: The samples were analyzed with a QExactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) through the EASY-spray nano ESI source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) that was coupled to an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) HPLC (high-pressure liquid chromatography) system. The trap (5 mm × 300 µm inner diameter) and the EASY-spray analytical columns (150 mm × 75 µm) used were C18 Pepmap100 (Dionex, LC Packings) having a particle size of 3 µm. Peptides were trapped at 30 μL/min in 96% of solvent A (0.1 % FA). Elution was achieved with the solvent B (0.1 % FA/80% acetonitrile v/v) at 300 nL/min. The 92 min gradient used was as follows: 0–3 min, 96% of solvent A; 3–70 min, 4–25% of solvent B; 70–90 min, 25–40% of solvent B; 90–92 min, 90% of solvent B; 90–100 min, 90% of solvent B; 101-120 min, 96% of solvent A. The mass spectrometer was operated at 2.2 kV in the data dependent acquisition mode. A MS2 method was used with a FT survey scan from 400 to 1600 m/z (resolution 70,000; auto-gain control target 1E6). The 10 most intense peaks were subjected to high collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (resolution 17,500; auto-gain control target 5E4, normalized collision energy 28%, max. injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion 35 s).

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) and Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) software packages were both used for peptide identification and label-free quantification. In the MaxQuant analysis, MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot (Swiss-Prot) protein sequence database under Homo Sapiens (version December 2018) using Andromeda. On the other hand, MS Amanda (version 2.0, University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria, Research Institute of Molecular Pathology) and Sequest HT search engines integrated within Proteome Discoverer software, were applied to search the raw MS data against the Uniprot (TrEMBL and Swiss-Prot) protein sequence database under Homo Sapiens (version December 2018). Database search parameters in MaxQuant were as follows: methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation and phosphorylation, as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, while in Proteome Discoverer were oxidation of methionine, as variable modification, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The mass tolerance of precursor mass was 20 ppm for MaxQuant and 10 ppm for Proteome Discoverer and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.15 Da (MaxQuant) and 0.02 Da (Proteome Discoverer). Minimal peptide length was set to 7 (MaxQuant) and 6 (Proteome Discoverer) amino acids and, at most, 2 missed cleavages were allowed for both software. The FDR for identification was set to 1% at both peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
To identify new protein targets for PCa detection, first, a shotgun discovery experiment was performed to characterize the urinary proteome of PCa patients. This revealed 18 differentially abundant urinary proteins in PCa patients. Second, selected targets were clinically tested by immunoblot, and the soluble E-cadherin fragment was detected for the first time in the urine of PCa patients. Third, the proteogenome landscape of these PCa patients was characterized, revealing 1665 mutant protein isoforms. Statistical analysis revealed 6 differentially abundant mutant protein isoforms in PCa patients. Analysis of the likely effects of mutations on protein function and PPIs involving the dysregulated mutant protein isoforms suggests a protective role of mutations HSPG2*Q1062H and VASN*R161Q and an adverse role of AMBP*A286G and CD55*S162L in PCa patients. This work originally characterized the urinary proteome, focusing on the proteogenome profile of PCa patients, which is usually overlooked in the analysis of PCa and body fluids. Combined analysis of mass spectrometry data using two different software packages was performed for the first time in the context of PCa, which increased the robustness of the data analysis. The application of proteogenomics to urine proteomic analysis can be very enriching in mutation-related diseases such as cancer.

### Keywords
Human; proteome; urine; prostate cancer

### Affiliations
University of Aveiro
Department of Medical Sciences, Institute of Biomedicine-iBiMED,Univerity of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro,Portugal

### Submitter
Tânia  Lima

### Lab Head
Dr Rui Vitorino
Department of Medical Sciences, Institute of Biomedicine-iBiMED,Univerity of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro,Portugal


