### Accession
PXD013354

### Title
Identification of human proteins whose binding to the N6-methyladenosine-containing hairpin from 28S rRNA is modulated by methylation

### Description
We have recently found that the human methyltransferase ZCCHC4 is responsible for introducing the single m6A modification in 28S rRNA. The project is aimed at further elucidating the functional consequences of such methylation. To this end, protein mass spectrometry is utilized to identify proteins that bind preferentially to the methylated or unmethylated form of the m6A containing hairpin sequence in 28S rRNA. Specifically, this is done by incubating a HeLa cell extract with an methylated or unmethylated RNA oligonucleotide containing a biotin affinity tag, which is used to pull-down the RNA with associated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis. Trypsinized HeLa cells were first washed extensively with PBS. Cells were then resuspended and lysed by adding five pellet volumes of whole cell extraction buffer (50mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5mM DTT, 10% glycerol, and and cOmplete™ EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche). This suspension was then incubated at 4 °C for 90 min in a rotation wheel, followed by a 30 min centrifugation at 21,000 g at 4 °C. Soluble whole cell extracts were then snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen until further usage. Dimethyl RNA pulldowns and mass spectrometry analysis. Buffer solutions were prepared with high-quality, RNase-free reagents. Four individual pull-downs were performed for each dimethyl-based RNA pulldown experiment. 20 µl of a 50% slurry of streptavidin Sepharose high-performance beads (GE Healthcare) were used for each pull-down. Beads were first washed twice with 1 mL of RNA binding buffer (50 mM HEPES-HCL, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40 (v/v), 10 mM MgCl2). Samples were centrifuged in a table top centrifuge for 3 min at 1,500 xg at 4 °C after each wash step. Beads were incubated with RNase inhibitor RNasin plus (Promega) in RNA binding buffer (100 µl buffer with 0.8 units of RNasin/µl) for 15 min at 4 °C in a rotating wheel to remove and inactivate RNases. Beads were then centrifuged and RNasin-RNase complexes were removed. Yeast tRNA (50 µg/mL; AM7119; Life Technologies) in RNA binding buffer was added to preblock the beads. After overnight incubation at 4 °C in a rotation wheel the beads were washed twice with RNA binding buffer followed by incubation with 5 µg of biotinylated RNA probe in a total volume of 600 µl RNA binding buffer. Biotinylated probes were allowed to bind to the streptavidin beads for 30 min at 4 °C in a rotation wheel. Beads were then washed with 1 ml of RNA wash buffer (50 mM HEPES-HCl, pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40 and 10 mM MgCl2) followed by two washes with protein incubation buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.1% (v/v) NP40, 0.5 mM DTT, and cOmplete™ EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche). Beads were subsequently incubated with 1 mg of whole cell extract for 30 min at room temperature followed by 90 min at 4 °C in a rotation wheel, in a total volume of 600 µl protein incubation buffer supplemented with 30 µg yeast tRNA and 200 Units RNasin. The beads were then washed three times with 1 mL protein incubation buffer followed by two washes with PBS. Next, beads were resuspended in 50 µl elution buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 2M urea and 10 mM DTT) for 20 min at room temperature in a thermoshaker at 1,500 r.p.m. A final concentration of 55 mM Iodoacetamide was added and beads were incubated in a thermoshaker for 10 min shaking at 1,500 r.p.m in the dark. 250 ng trypsin was added for 2 h at room temperature in a thermoshaker to partially digest the beads. Supernatant was collected after incubation in a separate tube, 50 µl elution buffer was added to the beads for 5 min at room temperature in a thermoshaker. Eluates were pooled and 100ng of fresh trypsin was added for overnight digestion of the proteins at room temperature. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 Stage tips [1] and differentially labeled with dimethyl isotopes CH2O or CD2O [2]. Labeled peptides were mixed to create forward and reverse reactions (Forward reaction: control probe, CH2O (light), N6-methyl-rA probe, CD2O (medium; reverse reaction: N6-methyl-rA probe, CH2O (light), control probe, CD2O (medium)). Samples were measured by LC-MS on an Orbitrap-Fusion-Tribrid instrument.

### Data Protocol
Samples were measured by LC-MS on an Orbitrap-Fusion-Tribrid instrument and raw mass spec data was analyzed by MaxQuant  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19029910) and visualized essentially as described (Edupuganti et al., NSMB 2017)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
N6-methyladenosine (m6a), Ribosome, Rna, Methyltransferase, Zcchc4

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA  Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Radboud University

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA  Nijmegen, The Netherlands.


