### Accession
PXD028547

### Title
Proteomic analysis of apoE-KO mice liver exposed to inhaled silicon dioxide.

### Description
ApoE-KO mice were treated with silicon monoxide for 16 weeks. Protein abundance changes in relation to untreated control were measured in liver samples fractionated to cytosol and mitochondria by SWATH-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed by FASP method and digested with trypsin. For spectral library preparation an all-sample pool prepared separately for both cellular compartments was fractionated by HpH into 12 fractions and analyzed by nano LC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo) coupled to TTOF 6600+ (Sciex) in DDA mode (98 min gradient). Next, all samples were measured by SWATH method with 100 variable window setup (63 min gradient).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed in Spectronaut 15 (Biognosys) in library-based mode with default settings. Data were filtered by 1% FDR cutoff on peptide and protein level, while quantitation and interference correction were done on the MS2 level. Deep Learning Assisted iRT Regression was set as iRT reference strategy for RT to iRT calibration with minimum R2 set to 0.8. Data were normalized by global regression strategy, while statistical testing for differential protein abundance was done using t-tests with multiple testing correction after Storey.

### Publication Abstract
The adverse effects of air pollution on the cardiovascular system have been well documented. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular events. However, the influence of exposure to airborne particles on the development of NAFLD is less recognised. The aim of this study was to investigate the impact of silica nanoparticles (SiNPs) on the development of liver steatosis. We used molecular and proteomic SWATH-MS methods to investigate the changes in the liver proteome of apolipoprotein E-knockout mice (apoE<sup>-/-</sup> mice) exposed to SiNPs for 4&#xa0;months in a whole-body exposure chamber. Exposure to SiNPs evoked microvesicular liver steatosis in apoE<sup>-/-</sup> mice. Quantitative liver proteomics showed significant downregulation of ribosomal proteins and endoplasmic reticulum proteins. Gene expression analysis revealed a reduced level of proteins related to endoplasmic reticulum stress. Treatment with SiNPs decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and increased the production of reactive oxygen species in cultured HepG2 cells. This is the first report that inhalation exposure to SiNPs induces microvesicular steatosis and significant changes in the liver proteome in vivo. Our results highlight the important role of silica and point to the ER stress response and mitochondrial dysfunction as potential mechanisms responsible for the increase in fatty liver by SiNPs.

### Keywords
Apoe-ko mice, Liver, Swath, Silicon dioxide

### Affiliations
Chair of Pharmacology Faculty of Medicine Jagiellonian University Medical College
Chair of Pharmacology

### Submitter
Maciej Suski

### Lab Head
Dr Rafal Olszanecki
Chair of Pharmacology Faculty of Medicine Jagiellonian University Medical College


