### Accession
PXD037229

### Title
Human brain glycoproteomic network alterations in Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
We performed a large-scale, site-specific N-glycoproteome profiling study of human Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and control brains using mass spectrometry–based quantitative N-glycoproteomics. The study provided a system-level view of human brain N-glycoproteins and in vivo N-glycosylation sites and identified disease signatures of altered N-glycopeptides, N-glycoproteins, and N-glycosylation site occupancy in AD. Glycoproteomic data-driven network analysis showed 13 modules of co-regulated N-glycopeptides/glycoproteins, 6 of which are associated with AD phenotypes. 

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, brain tissue (25 mg per AD or control case) was homogenized in 150 μl of lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM dithiothreitol, and 100 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.6), and protein concentration of the obtained protein extract was measured by ultraviolet spectrometry. To control for technical variations during sample processing and analyses, each protein extract was spiked with bovine a2-HS-glycoprotein (fetuin) at 0.1% (μg/μg total protein) as an internal reference standard. Protein extracts were processed according to the FASP protocol. Glycopeptides were enriched by using ZIC-HILIC. ZIC-HILIC microcolumn was prepared in-house by packing 10 mg of ZIC-HILIC media (Merck; particle size, 10 μm) in 100 μl of acetonitrile (ACN) into a 200-μl tip, which was plugged by a 3M Empore C8 extraction disk (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at the bottom of the tip. Purified peptides from each brain sample (100 μg of peptides per sample) were dissolved in a binding buffer containing 80% ACN and 5% formic acid (FA) and loaded onto a ZIC-HILIC microcolumn pre-equilibrated with the binding buffer (80% ACN and 5% FA). After washing the ZIC-HILIC microcolumn with 100 μl of the binding buffer five times, the captured glycopeptides were eluted with 80 μl of elution buffer (99.5% H2O and 0.5% FA) three times. Eluate containing the enriched glycopeptides was collected and dried. Purified glycopeptides were dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3 prepared with H218O (Sigma-Aldrich) and treated with PNGase F (New England Biolabs) at 37°C overnight. The PNGase F-mediated 18O-labeling of N-glycosites markedly reduced the false-positive rate of N-glycosite identification, as the incorporation of 18O introduces a specific mass shift of 2.9890 Da, which can be easily distinguished from spontaneous deamidation (mass shift of 0.9840 Da). The 18O-labeled peptides were desalted using a C18 ZipTip microcolumn and dried under vacuum. 2 μg glycopeptide from each sample were separated by using a nano-LC UltiMate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer with an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometric analysis was performed using data-dependent acquisition with full MS scans [mass/charge ratio (m/z) range from 375 to 1600; automatic gain control target, 1 million ions; resolution at 400 m/z, 60,000; maximum ion accumulation time, 50 ms] in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. 

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to search against the human UniProt TrEMBL database (2016_02 Release, 20,198 reviewed entries). The following parameters were used: 20-ppm precursor ion mass tolerance; 0.5-Da fragment ion mass tolerance; trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavages; fixed modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da); variable modifications: asparagine deamidation in H218O (18O tag of Asn, +2.9890 Da), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (+0.9840 Da), methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da). The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 1%. Only the peptides with 18O-tagged asparagine residue within the N-glycosylation sequon N-X-S|T|C (X ≠ P) were accepted as true N-glycosite–containing peptides, which we referred to as N-glycopeptides.
Quantitative analysis of N-glycopeptide abundance was performed by using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 to quantify the peak area (i.e., area under the curve) of individual 18O-labeled N-glycosite–containing peptides. The peak area of each N-glycopeptide was normalized to the peak area of the 18O-labeled internal standard N-glycopeptide KLCPDCPLLAPLN(18O)DSR derived from the spiked-in bovine fetuin protein in each sample to account for technical variability in sample processing and LC-MS/MS analyses. 


### Publication Abstract
Protein N-glycosylation plays critical roles in controlling brain function, but little is known about human brain N-glycoproteome and its alterations in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here, we report the first, large-scale, site-specific N-glycoproteome profiling study of human AD and control brains using mass spectrometry-based quantitative N-glycoproteomics. The study provided a system-level view of human brain N-glycoproteins and in vivo N-glycosylation sites and identified disease signatures of altered N-glycopeptides, N-glycoproteins, and N-glycosylation site occupancy in AD. Glycoproteomics-driven network analysis showed 13 modules of co-regulated N-glycopeptides/glycoproteins, 6 of which are associated with AD phenotypes. Our analyses revealed multiple dysregulated N-glycosylation-affected processes and pathways in AD brain, including extracellular matrix dysfunction, neuroinflammation, synaptic dysfunction, cell adhesion alteration, lysosomal dysfunction, endocytic trafficking dysregulation, endoplasmic reticulum dysfunction, and cell signaling dysregulation. Our findings highlight the involvement of N-glycosylation aberrations in AD pathogenesis and provide new molecular and system-level insights for understanding and treating AD.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Mass spectrometry, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology Emory University
Emory University

### Submitter
QI ZHANG

### Lab Head
Dr Lian Li
Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology Emory University


