### Accession
PXD026316

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis for identification of in-planta Magnaporthe oryzae proteins induced cell death

### Description
The rice blast disease caused by Magnaporthe oryzae (M.oryzae) is one of the most important disease in cultivated rice (Oryza sativa L.) results in extensive loss of productivity worldwide. Therefore, here we utilized the label-free quantitative proteomic approach to identify the novel M. oryzae effectors. A total of 114 were significantly modulated M. oryzae proteins derived from infected rice leaves. Among them, twenty-nine proteins were predicted as secreted proteins by SignalP 4.0. In addition, functional annotation proteins revealed that five proteins were mainly associated with hydrolase family. Consequently, five putative effector genes were cloned into a plant expression vector and fused with MYC tag in the C-terminal. Finally, we found that three in-planta M.oryzae hydrolase proteins were induced cell death after Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transient expression in Nicotiana benthamiana (N.benthamiana). MGP1 (endo-1,4-beta-xylanase) and MGP4 (cellulose-binding protein) were localized in extracellular. Otherwise, MGP5 (cutinase) localized in intracellular space induced cell death. Thus, our results suggest that in-planta M. oryzae hydrolase proteins may play a key role in innate immunity via PAMP (Pathogen-Associated Molecular Pattern) in rice.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins from leaves infected with pathogens were isolated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation method. Grinded powders (1 g) were homogenized with 10 mL of Tris-MG/NP-40 buffer [0.5 M Tris-HCI (pH 8.3), 2% (v/v) NP-40, 20 mM MgCl₂] and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was precipitated using TCA/acetone precipitation method for 24 hours at –20°C. After precipitation, tubes were centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The pellet was washed thrice by using cold 80% (v/v) acetone in distilled water containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol and dissolved in 80% acetone and stored at –20°C until analysis. Sequentially, Protein digestion was conducted using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) approach. Briefly, acetone-precipitated proteins (150 μg) were dissolved in 30 μL of denaturation buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 0.1 M tetraethylammonium tetrahydroborate (TEAB), pH 8.5). After sonication of the sample for 3 min and heating at 99°C for 30 min, denatured proteins were loaded onto a 30-kDa spin filter (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and diluted with UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M TEAB, pH 8.5) to a final volume of 300 μL. The buffer was washed and exchanged three times using 300 μL of UA buffer by centrifugation at 14,000 g for removal of SDS. After removing SDS from the samples, cysteine alkylation was accomplished through addition of 200 μL of alkylation buffer (50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Then, the buffer was exchanged with UA buffer to TEAB buffer (50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) in a spin filter unit. The protein was digested with trypsin (enzyme-to-substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:100) dissolved in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) at 37°C overnight. After overnight digestion, the digested peptides were collected by centrifugation, and the filter device was rinsed with 50 mM TEAB and 50 mM NaCl. The peptide concentrations were measured using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, the digest peptides were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80℃ until further LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) was used to apply for a database search. All the three technical replicates were cross-referenced against the Oryza sativa database. Label-free data processing was performed using default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda search engine, which is set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. The product mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da and maximum of two missed tryptic cleavage were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were specified as fixed and variable modifications respectively. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the FDR which was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Statistical analysis was carried out using Perseus software (ver. 1.5.8.5).

### Publication Abstract
Alternative splicing (AS) contributes to diversifying and regulating cellular responses to environmental conditions and developmental cues by differentially producing multiple mRNA and protein isoforms from a single gene. Previous studies on AS in pathogenic fungi focused on profiling AS isoforms under a limited number of conditions. We analysed AS profiles in the rice blast fungus <i>Magnaporthe oryzae</i>, a global threat to rice production, using high-quality transcriptome data representing its vegetative growth (mycelia) and multiple host infection stages. We identified 4,270 AS isoforms derived from 2,413 genes, including 499 genes presumably regulated by infection-specific AS. AS appears to increase during infection, with 32.7% of the AS isoforms being produced during infection but absent in mycelia. Analysis of the isoforms observed at each infection stage showed that 636 AS isoforms were more abundant than corresponding annotated mRNAs, especially after initial hyphal penetration into host cell. Many such dominant isoforms were predicted to encode regulatory proteins such as transcription factors and phospho-transferases. We also identified the genes encoding distinct proteins via AS and confirmed the translation of some isoforms via a proteomic analysis, suggesting potential AS-mediated neo-functionalization of some genes during infection. Comprehensive profiling of the pattern of genome-wide AS during multiple stages of rice-<i>M. oryzae</i> interaction established a foundational resource that will help investigate the role and regulation of AS during rice infection.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Nicotiana benthamiana, Maxquant, Perseus, Magnaporthe oryzae, Signalp, Label-free

### Affiliations
Pusan National University
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, South Korea

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, South Korea


