### Accession
PXD016052

### Title
Human A673 Ewing sarcoma secretome - effect of EWS-FLI-1 silencing

### Description
EWS-FLI-1 was silenced by an shRNA in A673 Ewing sarcoma cells and the resulting alterations in the secretome was analyzed by GeLC-MS/MS approach (six gel slices for each sample, luciferase shRNA-expressing cell secretome as control)

### Sample Protocol
The preparation of secreted protein samples, mass spectrometry analysis, and proteomics data processing were performed essentially as described (Elzi et al, 2016; Jayabal et al, 2017). A673 cells were infected with lentiviruses expressing an shRNA against FLI-1 C-terminal region or luciferase (control) and were selected with 2 µg/ml puromycin for two days. Cells were washed six times with DMEM without serum. Subsequently, cells were cultured in DMEM without serum for 24 hours and the culture supernatant was harvested. The supernatant was centrifuged, filtered through a 0.45-μm filter (Millipore), and concentrated using a 3,000-Da cut-off Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter Units (Millipore). The proteins in each sample were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie blue. Each gel lane was divided into six slices, and the proteins in each slice were digested in situ with trypsin (Promega modified) in 40 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C. The resulting tryptic peptides were analyzed by HPLC-ESI-tandem mass spectrometry on a Thermo Fisher LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The Xcalibur raw files were converted to mzXML format and were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human protein database (UniProt release 2016_04) using X! Tandem. The X! Tandem search results were analyzed by the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline, version 4.3. Peptide/protein identifications were validated by the Peptide/ProteinProphet software tools (Keller et al, 2002; Nesvizhskii et al, 2003).

### Publication Abstract
BAF chromatin remodeling complexes play important roles in chromatin regulation and cancer. Here, we report that Ewing sarcoma cells are dependent on the autocrine signaling mediated by NELL2, a secreted glycoprotein that has been characterized as an axon guidance molecule. NELL2 uses Robo3 as the receptor to transmit critical growth signaling. NELL2 signaling inhibits cdc42 and upregulates BAF complexes and EWS-FLI1 transcriptional output. We demonstrate that cdc42 is a negative regulator of BAF complexes, inducing actin polymerization and complex disassembly. Furthermore, we identify NELL2<sup>high</sup>CD133<sup>high</sup>EWS-FLI1<sup>high</sup> and NELL2<sup>low</sup>CD133<sup>low</sup>EWS-FLI1<sup>low</sup> populations in Ewing sarcoma, which display phenotypes consistent with high and low NELL2 signaling, respectively. We show that NELL2, CD133, and EWS-FLI1 positively regulate each other and upregulate BAF complexes and cell proliferation in Ewing sarcoma. These results reveal a signaling pathway regulating critical chromatin remodeling complexes and cancer cell proliferation.

### Keywords
Ewing sarcoma, Gelc-ms/ms, Secretome, Ews-fli-1

### Affiliations
The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio

### Submitter
Yuzuru Shiio

### Lab Head
Dr Yuzuru Shiio
The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio


