### Accession
PXD031665

### Title
Characterization of TP2 interactome

### Description
Spermiogenesis is marked by an almost genome-wide histone-to-protamine transition. Protamines are sperm-specific, small and highly positively charged proteins mainly responsible for genome compaction at this step. According to previous investigations from our lab and other groups, it is known that just before their removal, histones become hyperacetylated, which creates binding sites for the first bromodomain of a testis-specific member of the BET double bromodomain protein family, Brdt. Brdt’s first bromodomain is necessary for transition proteins (TPs) and PRMs incorporation and subsequent histone removal. Histone hyperacetylation, specifically on H4 lysine residues 5 and 8 which are recognized by Brdt, is controlled by a post-meiotic enhancer of CBP/p300 acetyltransferase activity, known as Nut. The process of TP assembly itself is dependent on a prior incorporation of a histone variant known as H2A.L.2, expressed in the same cells and at the same time as TPs. To characterize the proteins associating with TP2, we performed a mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis of TP2 co-immunoprecipitations elutes from condensing spermatids extract. The immunoprecipitation was performed using extract from stages 12-16 spermatids from wild-type and H2A.L.2-KO mice. In parallel, immunopurifications were performed using a non-specific antibody (pre-immune goat serum) to allow the identification of proteins specifically purified with TP2 as opposed to proteins non-specifically precipitated.

### Sample Protocol
Purified step 12-16 condensing spermatids obtained from two WT and two H2A.L.2-KO mice testes were lysed (10 min, on ice) in 1000 mL LSDB500 buffer (HEPES 50 mM pH 8, MgCl2 3 mM, KCl 500 mM, Glycerol 20%, NP-40 1%, Complete Protease inhibitor EDTA-free Roche). After centrifugation (20000 g, 4C, 10 min), the supernatant was diluted with 1000 mL LSDB0 (HEPES 50 mM pH 8, MgCl2 3 mM, Glycerol 20%, NP-40 1%, Complete Protease inhibitor EDTA-free Roche) and used for immunoprecipitation with anti-TP2 polyclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Cat#SC-21106) or an irrelevant antibody (pre-immune goat serum) overnight at 4°C. 25 mL of dynabeads protein G (Invitrogen) were added to the mix and incubated during 30min at 4°C. The beads were washed 3 times with 500 mL of LSDB250 buffer (HEPES 50mM pH 8, MgCl2 3 mM, KCl 250 mM, Glycerol 20%, NP-40 1%, Complete Protease inhibitor EDTA-free Roche). The proteins from immunoprecipitation eluates were separated by SDS-PAGE on 4–12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) and stained with R-250 Coomassie blue. Each gel lanes were cut into six sections that were subjected to in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoLC-MS/ MS (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific). For this purpose, peptides were sampled on a 300 mm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 mm x 250 mm PepMap C18 column (Thermo Scientific). MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the software Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30), the UniProt database (Mus musculus taxonomy) and the frequently observed contaminant database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length and minimum number of unique peptides were respectively set to seven amino acids and one. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. The Match Between Run option was enabled with the default settings. Protein intensities were calculated from extracted MS intensities of unique peptides and used to compute iBAQ values.

### Publication Abstract
Histone-to-protamine transition is an essential step in the generation of fully functional spermatozoa in various mammalian species. In human and mouse, one of the two protamine-encoding genes produces a precursor pre-protamine 2 (pre-PRM2) protein, which is then processed and assembled. Here, we design an original approach based on the generation of pre-PRM2-specific antibodies to visualize the unprocessed pre-PRM2 by microscopy, flow cytometry and immunoblotting. Using mouse models with characterized failures in histone-to-protamine replacement, we show that pre-PRM2 retention is tightly linked to impaired nucleosome disassembly. Additionally, in elongating/condensing spermatids, we observe that pre-PRM2 and transition protein are co-expressed spatiotemporally, and their physical interaction suggests that these proteins act simultaneously rather than successively during histone replacement. By using our anti-human pre-PRM2 antibody, we also measured pre-PRM2 retention rates in the spermatozoa from 49 men of a series of infertile couples undergoing ICSI, which shed new light on the debated relation between pre-PRM2 retention and sperm parameters. Finally, by monitoring 2-pronuclei embryo formation following ICSI, we evaluated the fertilization ability of the sperm in these 49 patients. Our results suggest that the extent of pre-PRM2 retention in sperm, rather than pre-PRM2 accumulation per se, is associated with fertilization failure. Hence, anti-pre-PRM2 antibodies are valuable tools that could be used in routine monitoring of sperm parameters in fertility clinics, as well as in experimental research programmes to better understand the obscure process of histone-to-protamine transition.

### Keywords
Mouse, Nanolc-ms/ms, Spermatogenesis, Interactome, Transition protein 2, Histone-to-protamine transition

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


