### Accession
PXD010629

### Title
Identification of CDC20/CDC20B partners in HEK cells demonstrates that CDC20, but not CDC20B, interacts with multiple APC/C components

### Description
Multiciliated cells (MCCs) harbour dozens to hundreds of motile cilia, which beat in a synchronized and directional manner, thus generating hydrodynamic forces important in animal physiology. In vertebrates, MCC differentiation critically depends on the synthesis and release of numerous centrioles by specialized structures called deuterosomes. Little is known about the composition, organization and regulation of deuterosomes. Here, single-cell RNA sequencing reveals that human deuterosome-stage MCCs are characterized by the expression of many cell cycle-related genes. We further investigated the uncharacterized vertebrate specific cell division cycle 20B (CDC20B) gene, the host gene of microRNA-449abc. We show that the CDC20B protein associates to deuterosomes and is required for the release of centrioles and the subsequent production of cilia in mouse and Xenopus MCCs. CDC20B interacts with PLK1, which has been shown to coordinate centriole disengagement with the protease Separase in mitotic cells. Strikingly, over-expression of Separase rescued centriole disengagement and cilia production in CDC20B-deficient MCCs. This work reveals the shaping of a new biological function, deuterosome-mediated centriole production in vertebrate MCCs, by adaptation of canonical and recently evolved cell cycle-related molecules.  A specific aim of this mass spectrometry experiment was to verify on immunoprecipitated protein complexes from CDC20 or CDC20B transfected HEK cells that CDC20, but not CDC20B, interacts with multiple APC/C components.

### Sample Protocol
Data were reprocessed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 equipped with Sequest HT. Files were searched against the Swissprot Homo sapiens FASTA database (update of February 2016). A mass accuracy of ± 10 ppm was used to precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Enzyme specificity was fixed to trypsin, allowing at most two miscleavages. Because of the previous chemical modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and only oxydation of methionine was considered as a dynamic modification. Reverse decoy databases were included for all searches to estimate false discovery rates, and filtered using the Percolator algorithm at a 1% FDR.

### Data Protocol
Data were reprocessed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 equipped with Sequest HT. Files were searched against the Swissprot Homo sapiens FASTA database (update of February 2016). A mass accuracy of ± 10 ppm was used to precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Enzyme specificity was fixed to trypsin, allowing at most two miscleavages. Because of the previous chemical modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and only oxydation of methionine was considered as a dynamic modification. Reverse decoy databases were included for all searches to estimate false discovery rates, and filtered using the Percolator algorithm at a 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Multiciliated cells (MCCs) harbor dozens to hundreds of motile cilia, which generate hydrodynamic forces important in animal physiology. In vertebrates, MCC differentiation involves massive centriole production by poorly characterized structures called deuterosomes. Here, single-cell RNA sequencing reveals that human deuterosome stage MCCs are characterized by the expression of many cell cycle-related genes. We further investigated the uncharacterized vertebrate-specific cell division cycle 20B (CDC20B) gene, which hosts microRNA-449abc. We show that CDC20B protein associates to deuterosomes and is required for centriole release and subsequent cilia production in mouse and Xenopus MCCs. CDC20B interacts with PLK1, a kinase known to coordinate centriole disengagement with the protease Separase in mitotic cells. Strikingly, over-expression of Separase rescues centriole disengagement and cilia production in CDC20B-deficient MCCs. This work reveals the shaping of deuterosome-mediated centriole production in vertebrate MCCs, by adaptation of canonical and recently evolved cell cycle-related molecules.

### Keywords
Cdc20b, Hek cells, Plk1, Separase, Cell cycle, Motile cilia, Deuterosome, Centriole, Cdc20

### Affiliations
Université Côte d'Azur
Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS

### Submitter
Pascal BARBRY

### Lab Head
Dr Pascal Barbry
Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS


