### Accession
PXD028641

### Title
RAT liver OXYGEN-VENTILATED NMP LC-MS/MS

### Description
The project was to compare NMP on liver retrieval in DCD rats.

### Sample Protocol
Liver biopsies obtained from the perfused liver were immediately snap-frozen with liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
In brief, the peptides were enriched by pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China), followed by analysis with tandem-mass-tag labeling combined with LC-MS/MS on the tissue samples. The resulting MS/MS data were processed by using the engine software MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The optimal oxygen concentration is unclear for normothermic machine perfusion (NMP) of livers from donation after circulatory death (DCD). Our purposes were to investigate the effect of air-ventilated NMP on the DCD liver, analyze the underlying mechanism and select the targets to predict liver functional recovery with NMP. NMP was performed using the NMP system with either air ventilation or oxygen ventilation for 2&#xa0;h in the rat liver following warm ischemia and cold-storage preservation. Proteomics&#xa0;and metabolomics were used to reveal the significant molecular networks. The bioinformation analysis was validated by administering peroxisome proliferator activator receptor-&#x3b3; (PPAR&#x3b3;) antagonist and agonist via perfusion circuit in the air-ventilated NMP. Results showed that air-ventilated NMP conferred a better functional recovery and a less inflammatory response in the rat DCD liver; integrated proteomics&#xa0;and&#xa0;metabolomics analysis indicated that intrahepatic docosapentaenoic acid downregulation and upregulation of cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) expression and activity were associated with DCD liver functional recovery with air-ventilated NMP; PPAR&#x3b3; antagonist worsened liver function under air-oxygenated NMP whereas PPAR&#x3b3; agonist played the opposite role. In conclusion, air-ventilated NMP confers a better liver function from DCD rats through the DAP-PPAR&#x3b3;-CYP2E1 axis; CYP2E1 activity provides a biomarker of liver functional recovery from DCD.

### Keywords
Rat liver nmp proteomics dcd

### Affiliations
Zhengzhou University

### Submitter
Ji-Hua Shi

### Lab Head
Dr Shui-Jun Zhang
Zhengzhou University


