### Accession
PXD037106

### Title
Transcriptome and proteome analysis of human brain organoids

### Description
During development of the human cerebral cortex, multipotent neural progenitors generate excitatory neurons and glial cells. Investigations of the transcriptome and epigenome have revealed important gene regulatory networks underlying this crucial developmental event. However, the post-transcriptional control of gene expression and protein abundance during human corticogenesis remains poorly understood. We addressed this issue by using a dual reporter cell line to isolate neural progenitors and neurons from the telencephalic brain organoid tissue and performed cell type and developmental stage-specific transcriptome and proteome analysis. Integrating the two datasets revealed temporal modules of gene expression during human corticogenesis, both at RNA and protein level. Our multiomics approach reveals novel posttranscriptional regulatory mechanisms crucial for fidelity of cortical development.

### Sample Protocol
Dorsal forebrain-enriched telencephalon organoids were generated as previously described with slight modifications (Esk et al., 2020). Organoids were dissociated in a Accutase-Trypsin solution supplemented with DNaseI. The dissociation was performed using a gentleMACS™ Dissociator. The dissociated and filtered single cell suspension was used for live cell FACS and a  minimum of two million cells pelleted and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Each cell pellet was resuspended in 72.5 µL 10M Urea 50mM HCl and incubated 10 min at room temperature. Then 7.5 µL 1M TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate) buffer (pH 8) was added and total protein amount determined by Bradford assays. Following, 1 µL Benzonase and 1.25 µL 1M DTT (dithiothreitol) was added to each sample and incubated for 37°C for 1h. Protein alkylation was performed with 2.5 µL of 1M IAA (iodoacetamide) and incubated for 30 min in the dark, reaction quenched with 0.6 µL 1M DTT. All samples were diluted with 100 mM TEAB Buffer to a urea conc. of 6M and proteins digested with LysC (Wako) for 3h at 37°C using an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. The samples were diluted with 100 mM TRIS buffer to a final Urea conc. of 2M. The final tryptic digestion (Trypsin Gold, Promega) was performed with an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37ºC. Peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges (Sep-Pak Vac 1cc (50mg), Waters) that were equilibrated with 500 µL methanol/water 50:50, 2x 0.5mL 80% acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 3x 0.5mL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The pH of all samples was adjusted to pH<2 with 10% TFA before they were loaded on the columns. For elution, 2x 200µL of 80% ACN and 0.1% FA were used. The organic content of the eluates was removed by using a SpeedVac. Samples were diluted to a volume of 200 µL with 0.1% FA, snap frozen with liquid nitrogen and lyophilized overnight. Samples were dissolved in 100 µL 100 mM HEPES. One bridge channel was produced from all FACS sorted cells. In these channels the corresponding samples were mixed in a 1 to 1 ratio.  For TMT labeling, 20 µg of peptides (in 100 µl 100 mM Hepes pH 7.6) were labelled with distinct channels of the TMTpro16 plex reagent (Thermo Fisher, TMT16plex). Labeling efficiency was determined by LC-MS/MS on a small aliquot of each sample. Samples were mixed in equimolar amounts. The mixed sample was acidified to a pH below 2 with 10% TFA and was desalted using C18 cartridges (Sep-Pak Vac 1cc (50mg), Waters). Peptides were eluted with 3 x 150 ml 80% Acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% Formic Acid (FA), followed by freeze-drying. The dried samples were dissolved in 70 µl of SCX Buffer A (5 mM NaH2PO4, pH 2.7, 15% ACN) and 200 µg of peptide were loaded on the column. SCX was performed using a custom-made TSK gel SP-2PW SCX column (5 µm particles, 12.5 nm pore size, 1 mm i.d. x 250 mm, TOSOH) on an Ultimate system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 35 µl/min. The gradient used started with 100% buffer A for 10 min, increased to 10% buffer B (5 mM NaH2PO4, pH 2.7, 1M NaCl, 15% ACN) and 50% buffer C (5 mM Na2HPO4, pH 6, 15% ACN) in 10 min, to 25% buffer B and 50% buffer C in 10 min, 50% buffer B and 50% buffer C in 5 min and an isocratic elution for further 15 min. ACN was removed by SpeedVac. Samples were acidified with 0.1% TFA and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The UltiMate 3000 RSLC system (Th. Sc.) was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spec. (Th. Sc.), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Th. Sc.). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Th. Sc., PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Th. Sc., PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl/min. The gradient started with the mobile phases: 98%A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2%B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v) increased to 35%B over the next 120 min, followed by a gradient in 5 min to 90%B, stayed there for five min and decreased in 2 min back to the gradient 95%A and 2%B for equilibration at 30°C The Q Exactive HF-X mass spec. was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 375-1650, nominal resolution of 120,000, target value 3e6) followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy of 35, isolation width of 0.7 m/z, resolution of 45.000, a target value of 1e5 and maximum fill time of 250 ms. For the detection of the TMT reporter ions a fixed first mass of 110 m/z was set for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (exclude charge state 1, 7, 8, >8) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 60s. Additionally, the minimum AGC target was set to 1e4 and intensity threshold was calculated to be 4e4. The peptide match feature was set to preferred and the exclude isotopes feature was enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4.0.305, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.13248 (Dorfer et al., 2014). The RAW-files were searched against the human uniprot-reference-database (20,541 sequences; 11,395,640 residues). The following search parameters were used: Iodoacetamide derivative on cysteine was set as fixed modification, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, oxidation on methionine, TMTpro-16plex tandem mass tag on lysine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine as well as carbamylation on peptide N-Terminus, TMTpro-16plex tandem mass tag on peptide N-Terminus, acetylation on protein N-Terminus were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±15 ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1% FDR on peptide-spectrum-match and protein level using Percolator (Käll et al., 2007) algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. The localization of the modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, which is based on phosphoRS (Taus et al., 2011). Peptides were quantified based on Reporter Ion intensities extracted by the “Reporter Ions Quantifier”-node implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter intensities of spectra with less than 50% isolation interference from unique peptides. Inspired by the iBAQ algorithm (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011), protein abundances were normalized by dividing summarized reporter intensities by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides with a length between 7 and 30 amino acids. TMT batches were normalized using a “bridge-channel” as reference which contains a mix of all samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gene regulation, Brain organoids, Neurodevelopment

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
IMBA – Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Jürgen A Knoblich
IMBA – Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria


