### Accession
PXD012729

### Title
Identify UFM1 targeted protein

### Description
we want to identify UFM1 target protein in human cells

### Sample Protocol
We transfected 293t cells with His-Flag plasmid or His-Flag-UFM1 plasmid seperately. The cells were harvested and lysed. The target protein were puried with nickel beads under denature condition and Flag agarose to decrease the background. The target protein was eluted off with Flag peptide. The sample was seperated with SDS-PAGE gel. The band was cut off and the proteins were analyzed with Mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases (human International Protein Index (IPI) database) with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) . All accepted peptides have a cross-correlation (Xcorr) score of at least 0.5. Protein FDR is 0%.

### Publication Abstract
The ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase, an upstream kinase of the DNA damage response (DDR), is rapidly activated following DNA damage, and phosphorylates its downstream targets to launch DDR signaling. However, the mechanism of ATM activation is still not completely understood. Here we report that UFM1 specific ligase 1 (UFL1), an ufmylation E3 ligase, is important for ATM activation. UFL1 is recruited to double strand breaks by the MRE11/RAD50/NBS1 complex, and monoufmylates histone H4 following DNA damage. Monoufmylated histone H4 is important for Suv39h1 and Tip60 recruitment. Furthermore, ATM phosphorylates UFL1 at serine 462, enhancing UFL1 E3 ligase activity and promoting ATM activation in a positive feedback loop. These findings reveal that ufmylation of histone H4 by UFL1 is an important step for amplification of ATM activation and maintenance of genomic integrity.

### Keywords
Human, 293t cell, Ufm1

### Affiliations
mayo clinic
Department of Oncology,Mayo clinic, USA

### Submitter
Bo Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenkun Lou
Department of Oncology,Mayo clinic, USA


