### Accession
PXD039419

### Title
Development of resistance to type II JAK2 inhibition in MPN depends on AXL kinase and is targetable

### Description
Purpose: Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) dysregulate JAK2 signaling. Since clinical JAK2 inhibitors have limited disease-modifying effects, type II JAK2 inhibitors such as CHZ868 stabilizing inactive JAK2 and reducing MPN clones, gain interest. We studied whether MPN cells escape from type ll inhibition.
Methods: MPN cells were continuously exposed to CHZ868. We used phosphoproteomic analyses and ATAC-/RNA-sequencing to characterize acquired resistance to type II JAK2 inhibition, and targeted candidate mediators in MPN cells and mice.
Results: MPN cells showed increased IC50 and reduced apoptosis upon CHZ868 reflecting acquired resistance to JAK2 inhibition. Among >2500 differential phospho-sites, MAPK pathway activation was most prominent, while JAK2-STAT3/5 remained suppressed. Altered histone occupancy promoting AP-1/GATA binding motif exposure associated with upregulated AXL kinase and enriched RAS target gene profiles. AXL knockdown resensitized MPN cells and combined JAK2/AXL inhibition using bemcentinib or gilteritinib reduced IC50 to levels of sensitive cells. While resistant cells induced tumor growth in NSG mice despite JAK2 inhibition, JAK2/AXL inhibition largely prevented tumor progression. Since inhibitors of MAPK pathway kinases such as MEK are clinically used in other malignancies, we evaluated JAK2/MAPK inhibition with trametinib to interfere with AXL-MAPK-induced resistance. Tumor growth was halted similarly to JAK2/AXL inhibition and in a systemic cell line-derived mouse model, marrow infiltration was decreased supporting dependency on AXL-MAPK.
Conclusions: We report on a novel mechanism of AXL-MAPK-driven escape from type II JAK2 inhibition, which is targetable at different nodes. This highlights AXL as mediator of acquired resistance warranting inhibition to enhance sustainability of JAK2 inhibition in MPN


### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 2M guanidium hydrochloride, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5mM TCEP, phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma P5726&P0044) by sonication (Bioruptor, 10 cycles, 30 seconds on/off, Diagenode, Belgium).  Proteins were subsequently reduced by 10 min incubation at 95 °C and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C. Samples were then diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final guanidium hydrochloride concentration of 0.5 M. Proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) for 12 h at 37°C. After digestion, samples were acidified with 5% TFA and peptides were purified using C18 reverse-phase spin columns (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried under vacuum and stored at -20°C until further use. Peptide samples were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges on an AssayMAP Bravo platform. Phospho-enriched peptides were resuspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1200 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 36cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.2 μLmin-1. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 5% B to 8% B over 5 min to 20% B over 45 min to 25% B over 15 min to 30% B over 10 min to 35% B over 7 min to 42% B over 5 min to 50% B over 3min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a scan range from 375 to 1600 m/z followed by MS2 scans of the most intense precursors in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) with isolation width of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50ms (MS1) and 54 ms (MS2) with an AGC target set to 250% and “Standard”, respectively. Only peptides with charge state 2 – 5 were included in the analysis. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide, and the Intensity Threshold was set to 2.5e4. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to 30%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was 30s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-file was searched using MASCOT against a human database (consisting of 40700 forward and reverse protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot on 20200417) and 392 commonly observed contaminants using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were processed using the SafeQuant R package v.2.3.2. to obtain peptide relative abundances. This analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak/reporter areas across all LC-MS runs, data imputation using the knn algorithm, summation of peak areas per protein and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of peptide abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. To meet additional assumptions (normality and homoscedasticity) underlying the use of linear regression models and t-Tests, MS-intensity signals were transformed from the linear to the log-scale. The summarized peptide expression values were used for statistical testing of between condition differentially abundant peptides. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-Tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package (http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html). The resulting p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
: lfq, Resistance, Dda, Chz868, Axl, Phosphoproteomics, Myeloproliferative neoplasms, Jak2 inhibition, Mapk

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel

### Submitter
Katarzyna Buczak

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel


