### Accession
PXD034463

### Title
mouse adult testis RNF17 Immuno-precipitation and mass-spectrometry (IP-MS)

### Description
To explore the mechanism of pachytene pirna biogenesis, we performed anti-RNF17 immunoprecipitation coupled with quantitative mass spectrometry (IP-MS) from testis extracts of adult mice.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh isolated testes from indicated genotypes were dissected and lysed in IP buffer (20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM magnesium acetate, 0.2% NP-40, 1 mM DTT, pH=7.3), clarified by centrifugation at 12,000 ×g, and then pre-cleared with protein A beads (Bio-Rad, 161-4013). The lysate was incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C on a rotator and conjugated with Protein A beads.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0.Peptides were searched against the mouse UniProt database

### Publication Abstract
Pachytene piRNA biogenesis is a hallmark of the germline, distinct from another wave of pre-pachytene piRNA biogenesis with regard to the lack of a secondary amplification process known as the Ping-pong cycle. However, the underlying molecular mechanism and the venue for the suppression of the Ping-pong cycle remain elusive. Here, we showed that a testis-specific protein, ADAD2, interacts with a TDRD family member protein RNF17 and is associated with P-bodies. Importantly, ADAD2 directs RNF17 to repress Ping-pong activity in pachytene piRNA biogenesis. The P-body localization of RNF17 requires the intrinsically disordered domain of ADAD2. Deletion of Adad2 or Rnf17 causes the mislocalization of each other and subsequent Ping-pong activity derepression, secondary piRNAs overproduced, and disruption of P-body integrity at the meiotic stage, thereby leading to spermatogenesis arrested at the round spermatid stage. Collectively, by identifying the ADAD2-dependent mechanism, our study reveals a novel function of P-bodies in suppressing Ping-pong activity in pachytene piRNA biogenesis.

### Keywords
Mouse testis rnf17

### Affiliations
 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Mengneng Xiong

### Lab Head
Dr Mengneng Xiong
Huazhong University of Science and Technology


