### Accession
PXD043119

### Title
Proteome of mass-produced Escherichia coli outer membrane vesicles

### Description
Large-scale production of bacterial extracellular vesicles is a hurdle for their development as novel cancer immunotherapeutic agents. Here, we developed manufacturing processes for mass production of Escherichia coli EVs known as outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). We present a comprehensive proteome of mass-produced E. coli OMVs.

### Sample Protocol
Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) ΔmsbB was cultured in animal-free lysogeny broth based on vegetable peptone using a 300 L-scale fermentation system, until the bacterial culture enters a stationary growth phase. The bacterial cells were removed by centrifugation and filtration. Then, the filtrate was concentrated using tangential flow filtration. The concentrate was filtrated before OMV isolation. OMVs were purified from the filtrated concentrate by ExoLutE® exosome isolation technologies (Rosetta Exosome, Seongnam, Republic of Korea), which comprises metal precipitation and size-exclusion chromatography. Finally, the OMVs were dialyzed against formulation buffer using a 100 kDa MWCO membrane, and were sterilized by a sequential filtration. Protein of OMVs were precipitated by the treatment of methanol/chloroform. Precipitated proteins were conducted by in-gel digestion as previously described (Cancers (Basel) 13:2842, 2021). The tryptic peptides were analyzed in LC-MS/MS with an Orbitrap EclipseTM TribridTM mass spectrometer coupled with an UltimateTM 3000 UHPLC system. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in water and injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano Viper 100 (75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm) trap column, at a flow rate of 5 μL/min with 0.095% formic acid in water for 4 min. Loaded peptides were separated on a PepMap RSLC C18 ES803A (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm) analytical column, by 180 min gradient from 5-90% of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Orbitrap EclipseTM TribridTM mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent Top 20 scans mode switching between MS and MS2. Peptides were analyzed with the following parameters: 10 ppm of mass accuracy, 1850 V of ion spray voltage, 275ºC of capillary temperature, m/z 375-1575 of resolution of full scans, and 120,000 higher-energy collisional dissociation activation scans with 35% normalized collision energy. The quadrupole isolation window was 1.4 Da. MS/MS spectra were detected on Orbitrap with resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
Three technical replicates of LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using X!Tandem packaged with Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (version 4.6). Each RAW data file was converted into mzML files using MSConvert (version 3.0.10107), and the mzML files were searched against E. coli K12 protein database from UniProt database (release 2022_04) using X!Tandem. The tolerance was 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. The permission of two potential missed cleavages was selected for trypsin digestion. The following modifications were used: fixed modification for the carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+15.995 Da) and variable modification for the oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da), deamination of N-terminal glutamine (-17.027 Da), and dehydration of N-terminal glutamic acid (-18.011 Da). Trans-Proteomic Pipeline was performed to statistically identify peptides by PeptideProphet (PeptideProphet ≥ 0.99) and proteins by ProteinProphet (ProteinProphet ≥ 0.99). Relative protein abundance of OMVs was calculated via weight spectral counting using the absolute protein expression tool (Nat Biotechnol. 25:117-124, 2007).

### Publication Abstract
Despite the capability of extracellular vesicles (EVs) derived from Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria to induce potent anti-tumour responses, large-scale production of bacterial EVs remains as a hurdle for their development as novel cancer immunotherapeutic agents. Here, we developed manufacturing processes for mass production of Escherichia coli EVs, namely, outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). By combining metal precipitation and size-exclusion chromatography, we isolated 357&#xa0;mg in total protein amount of E. coli OMVs, which was equivalent to 3.93 &#xd7; 10<sup>15</sup> particles (1.10 &#xd7; 10<sup>10</sup> particles/&#x3bc;g in total protein amounts of OMVs) from 160 L of the conditioned medium. We show that these mass-produced E. coli OMVs led to complete remission of two mouse syngeneic tumour models. Further analysis of tumour microenvironment in neoantigen-expressing tumour models revealed that E. coli OMV treatment causes increased infiltration and activation of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, especially those of cancer antigen-specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells with high expression of TCF-1 and PD-1. Furthermore, E. coli OMVs showed synergistic anti-tumour activity with anti-PD-1 antibody immunotherapy, inducing substantial tumour growth inhibition and infiltration of activated cancer antigen-specific stem-like CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells into the tumour microenvironment. These data highlight the potent anti-tumour activities of mass-produced E. coli OMVs as a novel candidate for developing next-generation cancer immunotherapeutic agents.

### Keywords
Mass production, Escherichia coli, Lc-ms/ms, Outer membrane vesicles

### Affiliations
Department of Life Sciences, POSTECH, Pohang, Republic of Korea
Department of Life Science

### Submitter
Yong Song Gho

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Song Gho
Department of Life Sciences, POSTECH, Pohang, Republic of Korea


