### Accession
PXD028904

### Title
New molecular insights into atrial fibrillation due to obscurin Ig58/59 deletion

### Description
Obscurins are giant, modular, cytoskeletal proteins that regulate striated muscle structure and function. Immunoglobulin domains 58/59 (Ig58/59) of obscurin interact with diverse proteins including titin variants and phospholamban. Mutations within Ig58/59 that alter these binding interactions have been linked to the development of myopathy in humans, underscoring the pathophysiological significance of this module. We previously generated a constitutive deletion mouse model, Obscn-ΔIg58/59, that expresses obscurin lacking Ig58/59 and comprehensively characterized the effects of this deletion on cardiac morphology and function through aging. Our findings demonstrated that Obscn-ΔIg58/59 male animals develop severe arrhythmia characterized by spontaneous atrial fibrillation/junctional escape by 6-months of age, with atrial enlargement and ventricular remodeling manifesting by 12-months. Herein, we aim to mechanistically evaluate the impact of the Ig58/59 deletion in atria at the cellular level and determine the molecular basis for atrial enlargement and arrhythmia due to the physiological process of aging. Ultrastructural evaluation of sedentary aging male Obscn-ΔIg58/59 atria revealed prominent Z-disk streaming and misalignment. More importantly, Obscn-ΔIg58/59 atrial cardiomyocytes exhibited increased Ca2+ spark frequency and age-specific alterations in Ca2+ cycling kinetics and sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ content that preceded those observed in Obscn-ΔIg58/59 ventricular cardiomyocytes. Proteomic and phospho-proteomic analyses revealed extensive and novel alterations in the expression and phosphorylation profile of major cytoskeletal proteins, Ca2+ regulators, and Z-disk associated protein complexes in Obscn-ΔIg58/59 atria through aging that likely underlie the observed atrial pathologies. These studies are the first to evaluate the role of obscurin in atria and to reveal chamber-specific molecular alterations due to Ig58/59 deletion. Moreover, our findings provide new molecular insights into a genetic model of spontaneous atrial fibrillation and remodeling where atrial dysfunction precedes ventricular maladaptation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics experiments were performed in the Mass Spectrometry Center at the University of Maryland School of Pharmacy. Tissue samples were homogenized in phosphate buffered saline using the Precellys CK14 lysing kit. Proteins were extracted and purified from tissue lysates by trichloroacetic acid precipitation. Protein concentration was measured by bicinchoninic acid assay. Lysates were reduced, alkylated, and trypsinolyzed on a 10K filter for shotgun proteomics. Phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2 affinity chromatography (Sigma). Tryptic peptides were separated by a nanoACQUITY UPLC analytical column on a Waters nano-ACQUITY UPLC system and analyzed with a coupled Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. In detail, tryptic peptides were separated on a nano-ACQUITY UPLC analytical column (BEH130 C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm × 200 mm, Waters) over a 165-min linear acetonitrile gradient (3–40%) with 0.1% formic acid on a Waters nano-ACQUITY UPLC system and analyzed on a coupled Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Full scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000, and precursors were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy at 30%) for a maximum 3-s cycle.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against a UniProt reference Mus musculus proteome using Sequest HT algorithm and MS Amanda algorithm with a maximum precursor mass error tolerance of 10 ppm. Resulting hits were validated at a maximum false discovery rate of 0.01 using a semi-supervised machine learning algorithm Percolator. Label-free quantifications were performed using Minoracluster quantification algorithm. Label-free quantitation of protein abundances were measured by comparing the MS1 peak volumes of peptide ions, whose identities were confirmed by MS2 sequencing. The above abundance values were imported into Partek GS software for further statistics and bioinformatic analyses. There were two mappings of the mass spectra: a) to individual proteins, and b) to unique phospho-peptides, wherein the phospho-peptide represents a unique specific position within its peptide. Following log2 transformation, the abundance values were then quantile normalized for each time point to minimize experimental noise among the lanes that represent replicate samples for the two biological classes (i.e., genotypes), and the Obscn-ΔIg58/59 samples were compared to the wild type with two-tailed one-way t-test ANOVA. Each protein or unique phospho-peptide compared received a relative abundance and statistical value, as a fold change and p-value, and the log2 fold changes were analyzed to determine their standard deviation from the mean value of no change. Both the individual proteins and unique phospho-peptide proteins were annotated with their cognate genes’ approved MGI/NCBI nomenclature. Proteins and phospho-peptides were deemed to show significant differential expression when their Obscn-ΔIg58/59 and wild-type log2 values differed by >2 standard deviations with a p-value of <0.05. These differentially expressed proteins were then analyzed with the QIAGEN Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) platform to determine their biological significance. Only the phospho-site residues that exhibited a probability >75% are reported; ambiguous phosphorylation sites (<75% probability) are denoted with the amino acid residues corresponding to the associated peptide when referenced in the text and tables. Phosphorylation sites not previously annotated in PhosphoSitePlus (v. 6.6.0.1.) were identified as novel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ca2+ cycling, Obscurin, Arrhythmia, Atrial fibrillation, Z-disk

### Affiliations
University of Maryland, Baltimore

### Submitter
Weiliang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Maureen Kane
University of Maryland, Baltimore


