### Accession
PXD029489

### Title
RNF31 inhibition sensitizes tumors to bystander killing by innate and adaptive immune cells

### Description
Tumor escape mechanisms for immunotherapy include deficiencies in antigen presentation, diminishing adaptive CD8+ T cell antitumor activity. Although innate NK cells are triggered by loss of MHC class I, their response is often inadequate. To increase tumor susceptibility to both innate and adaptive immune elimination, we performed parallel genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screens. This identified all components, RNF31, RBCK1, and SHARPIN, of the linear ubiquitination chain assembly complex (LUBAC). Genetic and pharmacologic ablation of RNF31, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, strongly sensitized melanoma, breast and colorectal cancer cells to both NK and CD8+ T cell killing. This occurred in a TNF-dependent manner, causing loss of A20 and non-canonical IKK complexes from TNF Receptor Complex I. Corroborating this preclinically, a small molecule RNF31 inhibitor sensitized human colon carcinoma organoids to TNF and greatly enhanced immune bystander killing of antigen-loss and antigen presentation machinery-deficient tumor cells. These results merit exploration of RNF31 inhibition as a clinical pharmacological opportunity for immunotherapy-refractory cancers.

### Sample Protocol
1×107 BLM cells (sgCtrl or sgRNF31) were cultured with the addition of HOIPIN-8 (20 µM) or vehicle for 24 hours before treatment with 100 ng/ml biotinylated TNF (BT210-010, R&D Systems) or unlabeled TNF (Peprotech) for 10 minutes. Cells were then collected and lysed in IP lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 120 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM KCl, 1% Triton X-100 and supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (04693159001, Roche)). TNF receptor complexes were then precipitated by using streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (88816, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 hour at 4 °C and subsequently analyzed by mass spectrometry. Purified protein complexes were eluted from magnetic beads using a 5% SDS solution and were digested using S-TRAP microfilters (ProtiFi) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, eluted samples were reduced and alkylated using DTT (20 mM, 10 min, 95 °C) and IAA (40 mM, 30 min). Next, samples were acidified and proteins were precipitated using a methanol TEAB buffer before loading on the S-TRAP column. Trapped proteins were washed 4 times with the methanol TEAB buffer and then digested for 1 hour at 47 °C using 1 µg Trypsin (Promega). Digested peptides were eluted and dried in a vacuum centrifuge before LC-MS analysis.  Samples were analyzed by reversed phase nLC-MS/MS using an Agilent 1290 HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Digested peptides were separated using a 50 cm reversed phase column packed in-house (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 µm, 50 cm x 75 µm) and eluted at a flow rate of 200 nL/min using a linear gradient with buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) ranging from 10-36 % B over 155 min, followed by a column wash and re-equilibration step. The total data acquisition time was 175 min. MS data was acquired using a DDA method with the following MS1 scan parameters: 60,000 resolution, AGC target equal to 3E6, maximum injection time of 20 msec, scan range of 375-1600 m/z, acquired in profile mode. The MS2 method was set at 30,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 1E5, a maximum injection time of 50 msec, and an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. Scans were acquired used a mass range of 200-2000 and an NCE of 27. The top 15 precursors ions were selected for with a dynamic exclusion time set to 24 sec, and a precursor charge selection filter for ion possessing +2 to +5 charges.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.10). MS/MS fragment spectra were searched against a human database (UniProt, year 2019) and common contaminants database. Default analysis settings were applied in MaxQuant with the following search modifications: methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Trypsin digestion was selected with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied at the protein, peptide, and modification level. A site localization probability of at least 0.75 was used as thresholds for the localization of phosphorylated residues (class I phosphosites). Protein abundances were calculated using label free quantification with default settings applied. Database search results were further processed in Perseus (version 1.6.12) for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tnf, Rnf31, Ap

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Kelly Stecker

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Utrecht University


