### Accession
PXD027874

### Title
Vibrio natriegens Systems & Synthetic Biology: Proteome Profile (Temperature & Salinity)

### Description
Vibrio natriegens is a rapidly growing salt marsh bacterium that is being developed as a synthetic biology chassis. We characterized its physiological response to different salinities and temperatures in order to optimize culturing conditions and understand its adaptations to a salt marsh environment. Using metabolomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics we determined what pathways respond to these environmental parameters. We found that organic osmolyte synthesis and membrane transporters were most responsive to changes in salinity. The primary osmolytes were glutamate, glutamine, and ectoine, responding to salinity across temperature treatments. However, when media was supplemented with choline, glycine betaine seemed to mostly replace ectoine. These results provide a baseline dataset of metabolic activity under a variety of conditions that will inform decisions made about culturing and genome engineering for future applications.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample processing and analysis. Pelleted cells collected from the reactors were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 10% n-propanol to a ratio of buffer:OD of 500:1. Lysis of 100 µl occurred via pressure cycling technology (PCT) in a Barocycler NEP 2320 (Pressure Biosciences, Inc., Easton, MA) (60 cycles of 45 kpsi for 20 seconds and ambient pressure for 10 sec at room temperature). Lysate protein concentration was quantified via Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). 10 µg of protein was digested in 150 µl total volume with a 1:50 ratio of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) using PCT (60 cycles of 45 kpsi for 50 sec and ambient pressure for 10 sec at 37 °C). Digests were immediately dried via speed-vac (Thermo Savant, Waltham, MA). Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid to a concentration of 50 ng/µl and 100 ng was injected into an LC-MS/MS system (U3000 LC coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA)) as described in (Spangler et al. 2019). The autosampler loaded the sample onto a trap column (PepMap 100, C18, 300 um ID x 5mm, 5um, 100A) via the loading pump at 5 µl/min flow rate and 2% solvent B. The analytical pump (300 nl/min) was used to elute peptides from the trap onto analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 um IDx150 mm, C18, 2um, 100A) using a two-step gradient of increasing solvent B (18% over first 80 min, followed by a 60% increase over 15 min). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data for each salinity and time point were searched against the UniProt reference predicted proteome of V. natriegens using MaxQuant v1.6.10.43 (http://www.maxquant.org). Experimental parameters for the files were set as each salinity and time point making up one condition. Default settings were maintained with the following deviations: variable modifications included oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) and the label-free quantification and match between runs features were enabled. The proteinsgroups.txt file containing LFQ intensities based on the MS level peak areas was loaded into R and analyzed for differential expression with the DEP package (Zhang et al. 2018). Data were filtered to exclude proteins with missing values greater than 1 in any replicate. Data were imputed using a mixed method with missing not at random proteins (defined when proteins were missing from all replicates in at least one condition) imputed using a zero method, and missing at random proteins were imputed using the BPCA setting. The statistical cutoff for significance was set at α of 0.05 and log2 fold change of 1.5. All plots were generated with the DEP or VennDiagram (Chen and Boutros 2011) package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Proteomics, Proteome, Synthetic biology, Vibrio natriegens, Vibrio

### Affiliations
Naval Research Laboratory
CBMSE

### Submitter
Judson Hervey

### Lab Head
Dr J Hervey
CBMSE


