### Accession
PXD032733

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis Reveals potential roles of PRDX3 for neurite outgrowth in N2a-APPswe Cells

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is characterized by amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles accompanied with progressive neurite loss. Mitochondria play pivotal roles in Alzheimer’s disease development. PRDX3 is a mitochondrial peroxide reductase responsible for H2O2 scavenge and signaling transduction. In this study, we found knockdown PRDX3 in N2a-APPSwe cell line induced neurite outgrowth, but not reduced cell viability against tert-butyl hydroperoxide (TBHP) induced cell damage. We found knockdown of PRDX3 induced dysregulation of one hundred proteins by Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeled proteomic study. Gene Ontology analysis revealed that the dysregulated proteins are enriched on establishment of protein localization to plasma membrane, lipid catabolic process, and intermediate filament cytoskeleton organization. String analysis showed closely protein-protein interactions among the dysregulated proteins. Annexin A1 (ANXA1), serine/threonine-protein phosphatase 2A catalytic subunit alpha isoform (PP2A) and glutathione S-transferase Mu 2 (GSTM2) were significantly upregulated in PRDX3 knockdown N2a-APPswe cell lines and verified by western blot. Our study for the first time revealed PRDX3 may also played important roles on neurite outgrowth and related AD development.

### Sample Protocol
TMT labeling Cells in each condition were collected and lysed with 8 M urea (dissolved in PBS, pH=8.0) lysis buffer. The protein concentrations of each sample were determined by Nanodrop 2000C. Equal amounts of proteins (50 μg) from each sample were reduced and alkylated with DTT and IAA, respectively. Trypsin/Ly-C mix (Promega, WI, USA) was used for protein digestion as suggested by the manufacture’s instruction. The peptides were desalted and labeled with TMT and fractioned with the Pierce High-pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit™ (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) as we published previously.  Peptide analysis with LC-MS/MS and Proteome Discoverer Each fraction was loaded onto Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (75 μm internal diameter (ID), 15 cm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA, USA) packed with C18 resin (300 Å, 5 μl; Varian, Lexington, MA, USA) and then analyzed by Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA). The mass spectrometer was control by Xcalibur 2.1.2 software in a data dependent acquisition model and a single full scan in the Orbitrap (ranged from 300 to 1800 m/z, 70,000 resolutions), followed by top 20 MS/MS scans were set as we previously used. MS/MS spectrum raw data were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) and the searching criteria were also set as previously.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis The online DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8 was used for Gene Ontology (GO) analysis. All the dysregulated proteins in PRDX3 knockdown cell lines (N2a-APP or BV2) were submitted to the data base and the items with a p value less than 0.01 were shown. STRING (10.0) and GO embedded in Cytoscape (3.8.0) was used for protein-proteins interaction analysis for the dysregulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles accompanied by progressive neurite loss. Mitochondria play pivotal roles in AD development. PRDX3 is a mitochondrial peroxide reductase critical for H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> scavenging and signal transduction. In this study, we found that PRDX3 knockdown (KD) in the N2a-APPswe cell line promoted retinoic acid (RA)-induced neurite outgrowth but did not reduce the viability of cells damaged by tert-butyl hydroperoxide (TBHP). We found that knocking down PRDX3 expression induced dysregulation of more than one hundred proteins, as determined by tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeled proteomics. A Gene Ontology (GO) analysis revealed that the dysregulated proteins were enriched in protein localization to the plasma membrane, the lipid catabolic process, and intermediate filament cytoskeleton organization. A STRING analysis showed close protein-protein interactions among dysregulated proteins. The expression of Annexin A1 (ANXA1), serine (Ser)-/threonine (Thr)-protein phosphatase 2A catalytic subunit alpha isoform (PP2A) and glutathione S-transferase Mu 2 (GSTM2) was significantly upregulated in PRDX3-KD N2a-APPswe cell lines, as verified by western blotting. Our study revealed, for the first time, that PRDX3 may play important roles in neurite outgrowth and AD development.

### Keywords
Prdx3, Mitochondria, Neurite

### Affiliations
Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention

### Submitter
Benhong Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Benhong Xu
Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention


