### Accession
PXD029290

### Title
Topographic mapping of the glioblastoma proteome reveals a triple axis model of intra-tumoral heterogeneity

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive form of brain cancer with well-established patterns of intra-tumoral heterogeneity implicated in treatment resistance, recurrence and progression. While regional and single cell transcriptomic variations of GBM have been recently resolved, downstream phenotype-level proteomic programs have yet to be assigned to specific niches. Here, we leverage mass spectrometry to spatially align abundance levels of 4,794 proteins to GBM’s hallmark histomorphologic niches across 20 patients and define distinct molecular programs operational within these regional tumor compartments.  Using machine learning, we overlay concordant transcriptional information, and define two distinct proteogenomic programs, MYC- and KRAS-axis hereon, that cooperate with hypoxia to produce a tri-dimensional model of intra-tumoral heterogeneity. Importantly, we show using multiple cohorts, that GBMs with an enhanced KRAS component harbor a more clinically aggressive and infiltrative phenotype. Conversely, tumor cells enriched along the MYC axis where mutually exclusive and had a distinct proliferative program. Moreover, by applying both experimental and computational approaches to link each of these distinct molecular axes with potential pharmacological therapies, we highlight differential drug sensitivities and a notable relative chemoresistance in GBM cell lines with enhanced KRAS programs. Importantly, pharmacological differences were less evident when using traditional expression-based subgroups supporting thattopographic phenotypic mapping ofGBM, and the proposed axes may provide new insights for targeting heterogeneity and overcoming therapy resistance in this aggressive disease.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, 50 μL of 1% Rapigest™ (Waters Corp.) was added to each sample and stored overnight at 4oC. 200 μL of a solution including dithiothreitol (8 mM), ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM) and tris-HCl (200 mM) was added to each sample. The samples were then sonicated on high with 30 second intervals using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) for 30 mins on high. Solutions were then centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 mins and the supernatant was collected. The supernatant was then heated to 95oC for 45 mins followed by 80oC for 90 mins using a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf). For alkylation, 20 μL of iodoacetamide (300 mM) was added to each solution in the absence of light. 1 μg of trypsin / Lys-C mix (Promega) was added to each sample and left to react overnight at 37oC and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a final concentration of 1% prior to stagetip cleanup step.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data files were processed using MaxQuant Andromeda (version 1.5.5.1) search engine (www.coxdocs.org) against the Human Swissprot protein database (July, 2019 version). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE48 partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD019381 (. Analysis of proteomic data was performed using a variety of biostatistical platforms Perseus (www.coxdocs.org), R (www.r-project.org), Orange (https://orange.biolab.si/), GSEA (https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/index.jsp) and Cytoscape (https://cytoscape.org/). Based on the number of proteins identified by MS/MS and the total number of proteins identified, Cook’s distance and leverage analysis were then performed using R scripts to identify outliers

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma is an aggressive form of brain cancer with well-established patterns of intra-tumoral heterogeneity implicated in treatment resistance and progression. While regional and single cell transcriptomic variations of glioblastoma have been recently resolved, downstream phenotype-level proteomic programs have yet to be assigned across glioblastoma's hallmark histomorphologic niches. Here, we leverage mass spectrometry to spatially align abundance levels of 4,794 proteins to distinct histologic patterns across 20 patients and propose diverse molecular programs operational within these regional tumor compartments. Using machine learning, we overlay concordant transcriptional information, and define two distinct proteogenomic programs, MYC- and KRAS-axis hereon, that cooperate with hypoxia to produce a tri-dimensional model of intra-tumoral heterogeneity. Moreover, we highlight differential drug sensitivities and relative chemoresistance in glioblastoma cell lines with enhanced KRAS programs. Importantly, these pharmacological differences are less pronounced in transcriptional glioblastoma subgroups suggesting that this model may provide insights for targeting heterogeneity and overcoming therapy resistance.

### Keywords
Gbm, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Princess Margaret Hospital University of Toronto University Health Network
Mt. Sinai Hospital

### Submitter
Ugljesa Djuric

### Lab Head
Dr Phedias Diamandis
Princess Margaret Hospital University of Toronto University Health Network


