### Accession
PXD012416

### Title
A MITOCHONDRIAL STRESS RESPONSE TRIGGERED BY DEFECTS  IN PROTEIN SYNTHESIS QUALITY CONTROL

### Description
Quality control defects of mitochondrial nascent chain synthesis trigger a sequential stress response characterised by OMA1 activation and ribosome decay, determining mitochondrial form and function.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were isolated (Qiagen) from control and m.9205delTA MT-ATP6 fibroblasts cultured at 37°C or following a 4 hour heat shock at 45°C. Mitochondria were lysed (PBS, 1% dodecyl-maltoside (DDM), 1 mM PMSF, and complete protease inhibitor (Thermo Fisher)) on ice for 20 minutes and then centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 20 minutes at +4C. Insoluble material was discarded and proteins in the supernatant were precipitated with acetone.  The protein pellet was dissolved in ProteaseMax (Promega) in 50mM NH4HCO3, and the proteins were reduced, alkylated and in-solution digested with trypsin (Promega) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were desalted and concentrated before mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore). The peptides were eluted twice with 0.1 % FA / 50 % ACN, dried, and solubilized in 7 μL 0.1 % FA for mass spectrometry analysis. Each peptide mixture was analyzed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactivePlus, ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray/Thermo). For the liquid chromatography separation of the peptides we employed an EasySpray column capillary of 25 cm bed length (C18, 2 μm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter, Thermo). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and the peptides were eluted with a 2-30 % gradient of solvent B in 60 minutes. Solvent A was aqueous 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B 100 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid. The data-dependent acquisition automatically switched between MS and MS/MS mode. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired from a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of 400 to 1,200 with the resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the quadruple. For MS/MS, the ten most abundant multiple-charged ions were selected for fragmentation on the high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. The MS/MS scans were collected at a resolution of 17,500. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0 for protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. The UniProt human database (October 2017) was used for the database searches. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was employed with default settings. Known contaminants as provided by MaxQuant and identified in the samples were excluded from further analysis. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus software version 1.5.6.0. The LFQ data were log10 transformed, filtered to include only proteins which were quantified in at least in three out of five replicates in at least one group, and missing values were imputed with values representing a normal distribution with default settings in Perseus. To find statistically significant differences between the groups T-test was performed using permutation-based FDR with 0.05 cut off

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria have a compartmentalized gene expression system dedicated to the synthesis of membrane proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. Responsive quality control mechanisms are needed to ensure that aberrant protein synthesis does not disrupt mitochondrial function. Pathogenic mutations that impede the function of the mitochondrial matrix quality control protease complex composed of AFG3L2 and paraplegin cause a multifaceted clinical syndrome. At the cell and molecular level, defects to this quality control complex are defined by impairment to mitochondrial form and function. Here, we establish the etiology of these phenotypes. We show how disruptions to the quality control of mitochondrial protein synthesis trigger a sequential stress response characterized first by OMA1 activation followed by loss of mitochondrial ribosomes and by remodelling of mitochondrial inner membrane ultrastructure. Inhibiting mitochondrial protein synthesis with chloramphenicol completely blocks this stress response. Together, our data establish a mechanism linking major cell biological phenotypes of AFG3L2 pathogenesis and show how modulation of mitochondrial protein synthesis can exert a beneficial effect on organelle homeostasis.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial disease; translation; ribosome; membrane; quality control

### Affiliations
Head of Proteomics, Dept of Immunology, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics, Dept of Immunology, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital


