### Accession
PXD012761

### Title
Plant Cell Wall Proteomics: A Focus on Monocot Species, Brachypodium distachyon, Saccharum spp. and Oryza sativa

### Description
We performed cell wall proteins (CWPs) extraction and analysis from sugarcane 7-month-old young and mature leaves and basal and apical internodes in order to point the differences regarding the cell wall proteome composition in these specific organs and diverse developmental stages. We used two different extraction methods for leaves CWPs: destructive and non-destructive. For internodes, only the non-destructive technique was used. The collection of CWPs was identified through LC-MS/MS analyses. Altogether, 110 sugarcane CWPs were identified and classified into eight functional categories. Sugarcane has one of the highest coverage of CWPs identified by mass spectrometry, reaching 283.

### Sample Protocol
Leaves and stem internodes at different developmental stages from sugarcane variety SP80-3280 were used. The samples were named: basal internodes referring to 5, 6 and 7 internodes, apical internodes referring to 1, 2 and 3 internodes, mature leaves referring to 1, 2 and 3 leaves, and young leaves referring to -3, -2 and -1 leaves. After harvest, the leaves and internodes were cut in pieces of about 7 cm each and submitted to CWPs extraction through a vacuum infiltration technique. Young and mature leaves had their CWPs extracted through a destructive method, additionally. For the vacuum infiltration, the organs of three independent plants were collected, washed with UHQ water, cut in small pieces (7 cm in length) and then immersed in a beaker with a solution containing 5 mM sodium acetate, pH 4.6, 0.3 M mannitol, 0.2 M CaCl2 and 0.1% (v/v) anti-protease cocktail. The beaker was placed in a desiccator attached to a vacuum pump and plant materials were infiltrated under vacuum for 10 min. The material was centrifuged at 200 g for 20 min at 4 °C in swinging buckets. The resulting fluids were collected at the bottom of the tubes. The process of vacuum infiltration followed by centrifugation was repeated. The plant organs were infiltrated again and centrifuged, as previously, in a solution containing 2 M LiCl instead of CaCl2.  The destructive extraction method used leaves cut in pieces of 7 cm each and transferred to a blender with 500 mL of a sodium acetate buffer (5mM, pH 4.6, plus 0.4 M sucrose, 1 g per 10 g of fresh tissue of polyvinylpolypyrrolidone, and 3.3 % (v/v) anti-protease cocktail. The plant samples were ground in the blender at maximum speed for 8 min. After centrifugation for 15 min at 1000 g and 4 °C, cell walls were separated from cytoplasm. The pellet was submitted to two rounds of centrifugation in 500 mL of sodium acetate buffer plus 0.6 and 1 M sucrose. The pellet was extensively washed on a Nylon net (50 μm) with the sodium acetate buffer. The cell wall fraction was ground with liquid nitrogen and freeze dried. The extraction of CWPs used 0.2 M CaCl2 and 2 M LiCl solutions and sequential centrifugations, as it was done for the vacuum infiltration technique.  The protein extracts from both extraction techniques were desalted on EconoPac® 10DG column. Proteins were then solubilized in UHQ water. Three biological replicates were performed.  Protein identification and quantification were performed by mass spectrometry (MS) subsequently. Phosphorylase B-rabbit was used as an internal standard: 8 μL of 100 fmol.μL-1 to the digested aliquot (1 µg/µL). Consequently, 32 µL of 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 were added to the vials, reaching a final volume of 40 µL.  For each extract, 9 µL of the total protein digest were fractionated by reverse-phase ultraperformance liquid chromatography. Peptides were efficiently separated by two successive RP chromatography steps at pH 10.0 and pH 2.1, respectively. Acquisition of MSE data used a Synapt G2 HDMS equipped with an ion mobility cell and a NanoLockSpray source in the positive ion and `V´mode. MS experiments were performed by switching between low (3 eV) and high collision energies (15-50 eV) applied to the `T-wave´ cell trap, filled with argon. The low and high energy scans from m/z 50 to 2000. The intensities of the spectra were calculated using the stoichiometric method, according to the internal standard.  Mass spectra of the peptide fragments were acquired by 2D Technology nanoACQUITY- Waters. First dimension separation was achieved in an XBridge BEH130 C18 5µm 300 µm x 50 mm column. Elution was performed using 5 different binary gradients with 20 mM pH 10 ammonium formate in acetonitrile. Eluted peptides from the first dimension column were trapped in a Symmetry C18 5 µm 180 µm x 20 mm column and diluted, online, with acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 2 µL min-1. Second dimension separation was performed in a HSS T3 1.8 µm 75 µm x 100 mm column, using a binary gradient from 3 to 85% of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, during 52 min, at a flow rate of 350 nL min-1.The doubly-charged ion ([M+2H]2+) was used for initial single-point calibration and MS/MS fragment ions of GFP [Glu 1]-Fibrinopeptide B m/z 785,84206 ([M + 2H]2+) were used as lock masses and instrument calibration.  Proteins were identified with the embedded ion-accounting algorithm of ProteinLynx Global Server (version 2.5.1) software searching into SUCEST (originally 43,141 clusters) to which the sequence of rabbit phosphorylase was appended. The processing parameters included automatic mode for MS-TOF resolution and chromatographic peak width, minimum of 3 fragment ion matched per peptide, minimum of 7 fragment ions matched per protein, minimum of 2 peptide matched per protein, one missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionines as fixed and variable modifications. The false positive rate was set under 4%.

### Data Protocol
The identification of proteins was performed by using the SUCEST database. Homolog genes in Sorghum bicolor were systematically searched for using blastp. Bioinformatics predictions of subcellular localization and functional domains were done on ESTs when they were full-length, otherwise on homolog S. bicolor genes. Only proteins present in at least two of the three biological replicates were considered. This work was done either manually for sugarcane translated ESTs or using ProtAnnDB for Sorghum bicolor homolog sequences (www.polebio.lrsv.ups-tlse.fr/ProtAnnDB/). All the data have been included in the WallProtDB database (www.polebio.lrsv.ups-tlse.fr/WallProtDB/).

### Publication Abstract
Plant cell walls mostly comprise polysaccharides and proteins. The composition of monocots' primary cell walls differs from that of dicots walls with respect to the type of hemicelluloses, the reduction of pectin abundance and the presence of aromatic molecules. Cell wall proteins (CWPs) differ among plant species, and their distribution within functional classes varies according to cell types, organs, developmental stages and/or environmental conditions. In this review, we go deeper into the findings of cell wall proteomics in monocot species and make a comparative analysis of the CWPs identified, considering their predicted functions, the organs analyzed, the plant developmental stage and their possible use as targets for biofuel production. <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> CWPs were considered as a reference to allow comparisons among different monocots, i.e., <i>Brachypodium distachyon</i>, <i>Saccharum</i> spp. and <i>Oryza sativa</i>. Altogether, 1159 CWPs have been acknowledged, and specificities and similarities are discussed. In particular, a search for <i>A. thaliana</i> homologs of CWPs identified so far in monocots allows the definition of monocot CWPs characteristics. Finally, the analysis of monocot CWPs appears to be a powerful tool for identifying candidate proteins of interest for tailoring cell walls to increase biomass yield of transformation for second-generation biofuels production.

### Keywords
Plant cell wall/proteome/monocot/stiff brome/rice/sugarcane

### Affiliations
ESALQ USP
Department of Genetics, "Luiz de Queiroz" College of Agricculture, University of São Paulo, Piracicaba, Brazil

### Submitter
Thais Cataldi

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos Alberto Labate, Maria Juliana Calderan-Rodrigues, Thaís Regiani Cataldi
Department of Genetics, "Luiz de Queiroz" College of Agricculture, University of São Paulo, Piracicaba, Brazil


