### Accession
PXD027835

### Title
Growth Rate Dependent and Nutrient-specific Gene Expression Resource Allocation in Fission Yeast

### Description
Cellular resources are limited and their relative allocation to gene expression programmes determines physiological states and global properties such as the growth rate. Quantitative studies using various growth conditions have singled out growth rate as a major physiological variable explaining relative protein abundances. Here, we used the simple eukaryote Schizosaccharomyces pombe to determine the importance of growth rate in explaining relative changes in protein and mRNA levels during growth on a series of non-limiting nitrogen sources. Although half of fission yeast genes were significantly correlated with the growth rate, this came alongside widespread nutrient-specific regulation. Proteome and transcriptome often showed coordinated regulation but with notable exceptions, such as metabolic enzymes. Genes positively correlated with growth rate participated in every level of protein production with the notable exception of RNA polymerase II, whereas those negatively correlated mainly belonged to the environmental stress response programme. Critically, metabolic enzymes, which represent ~55-70% of the proteome by mass, showed mainly condition-specific regulation. Specifically, many enzymes involved in glycolysis and NAD-dependent metabolism as well as the fermentative and respiratory pathways were condition-dependent and not consistently correlated with growth. In summary, we provide a rich account of resource allocation to gene expression in a simple eukaryote, advancing our basic understanding of the interplay between growth-rate dependent and nutrient-specific gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from 10 ml of each turbidostat culture was frozen in dry ice and stored at -80 °C until sample preparation. Once thawed, cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 1% ammonium bicarbonate). Lysis was performed in a FastPrep instrument (MP Biomedical) for 5 pulses at a speed of 6 m/s. Total cell extracts were treated with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 15 min at room temperature to reduce the disulphide bonds. An alkylation reaction was performed with the addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25 °C in the dark. The reaction was quenched using 12 mM N-acetyl-cysteine for 10 min. The proteins were quantified using a BCA Protein Assay Reducing Agent Compatible kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) and 100 μg of total protein was used for digestion. To improve the cleavage efficiency, protein extracts underwent a double digestion, first with Lys-C (Wako chemicals, USA) for 4 h at 37 °C using a 1:200 (w/w) ratio, and then overnight with porcine trypsin at 37 °C using a 1:100 (w/w) ratio. Digestion was stopped by lowering the pH with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a final volume of 1%. The deoxycholic acid precipitate formed due to the lowered pH was removed by centrifuging the samples at 4 °C for 15 min at 14,000 rpm. The precipitated detergent was then discarded. The digested peptides were vacuum dried and stored at -80 °C until required for analysis. The protein digests were analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) via an untargeted analysis approach using Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) (Ducret et al. 1998). The raw MS data was analysed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann 2008) and applying the Label-free Quantification algorithm (Cox et al. 2014) for DDA data analysis. Protein digests were reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and transferred to autosampler vials for LC-MS/MS analysis. The tryptic peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY-Spray source. Sample volumes were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100 um x 2 cm) at 8 ul/min of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted on-line to an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap C18, 75 um x 75 cm). Peptides were separated at 200 nl/min with a ramped 180 min gradient using 4%-30% buffer B (buffer A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 150 min, and 30%-45% buffer B over 30 min. Eluted peptides were analysed by operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 70,000 resolution (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap followed by Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) of the top 12 most abundant. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets set to 3e6 and 5e4 ions for maximum injection times of 50 ms and 110 ms, respectively. A survey scan covering the range of 400–1800 m/z was used, with HCD parameters of isolation width 2.0 m/z and a normalised collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
DDA data was processed using the MaxQuant software platform (v1.6.10.43) (Cox and Mann 2008) with database searches performed by the in-built Andromeda search engine against the PomBase database (5,138 entries, v.20190507) (Lock et al. 2019). A reverse decoy database was created, and the results displayed at a 1% false discovery rate (fdr) for peptide spectrum matches and identified proteins. The search parameters included trypsin, two missed cleavages, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, asparagine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 1. The ‘match between runs’ function was used with match and alignment time limits of 0.7 and 20 min, respectively. Intensities were based on identified unique and razor peptides, and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was calculated as the raw intensity/number of obtainable tryptic peptides. For the post-processing of the MaxQuant output, the data was filtered for detection in all three biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fission yeast, Transcriptomics, Resource allocation, Proteomics, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Gene expression

### Affiliations
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility Hammersmith Hospital Campus Du Cane Road London, W12 0NN United Kingdom
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Holger Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Holger Kramer
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility Hammersmith Hospital Campus Du Cane Road London, W12 0NN United Kingdom


