### Accession
PXD028697

### Title
Co-activation of Sonic hedgehog and Wnt signaling in murine retinal precursor cells drives ocular lesions with features of intraocular medulloepithelioma

### Description
Intraocular medulloepithelioma (IO-MEPL) is a rare embryonal ocular neoplasm, prevalently occurring in children. IO-MEPL share histomorphological features with CNS embryonal tumors with multilayered rosettes (ETMR), referred to as intracranial medulloepitheliomas. While Sonic hedgehog (SHH) and WNT signaling pathways are crucial for ETMR pathogenesis, the impact of these pathways on human IO-MEPL development is unclear. Gene expression analyses of human embryonal tumor samples revealed similar gene expression patterns and significant overrepresentation of SHH and WNT target genes in both IO-MEPL and ETMR. In order to unravel the function of Shh and Wnt signaling for IO-MEPL pathogenesis in vivo, both pathways were activated in retinal precursor cells in a time point specific manner. Shh and Wnt co-activation in early Sox2- or Rax- expressing precursor cells resulted in infiltrative ocular lesions that displayed extraretinal expansion. Histomorphological, immunohistochemical and molecular features showed a strong concordance with human IO-MEPL. We demonstrate a relevant role of WNT and SHH signaling in IO-MEPL and report the first mouse model to generate tumor-like lesions with features of IO-MEPL. The presented data may be fundamental for comprehending IO-MEPL initiation and developing targeted therapeutic approaches.

### Sample Protocol
In timed mating experiments of Rax-creERT2 (R, PMID: 24699247) and Ctnnb1(ex3)fl/flSmoM2fl/fl (BS, PMID: 10545105, PMID: 17047082) mice, the day of vaginal plug detection was considered E0.5. Pregnant females were intraperitoneally injected with tamoxifen (Sigma-Aldrich, T5648, solubilized in corn oil) at E8.5, 10.5, 12.5 or 14.5, twice with 0.6 mg per injection and in a 24-hour time interval. The eyes of the RBS and BS embryos were collected on E18.5, fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin (FFPE). FFPE eyes of RBS embryos subjected to tamoxifen on E8.5 (n=2), E10.5 (n=2), E12.5 (n=2), E14.5 (n=2) and eyes of BS littermates (n = 8), serving as controls, were used for mass spectrometric analysis. Moreover, FFPE tissue material of ETMR-like embryonal brain tumors of E18.5 hGFAP-cre::Ctnnb1(ex3)fl/flSmoM2fl/fl (GBS, n=2) mice (PMID: 28892064) was included in the analyses. FFPE tissue sections were deparaffinized with 300 μl N-heptane over a time period of 10 minutes and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14000 g. The supernatant was removed, and samples were reconditioned in 300 μl ethanol and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14000 g. The supernatant was removed, and samples resuspended and lysed in 200 μl triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) with 0.1 % sodium deoxycholate. (SDC). Heat induced reverse formalin fixation and protein denaturation were performed at 99°C over a period of 1 hour at a rotation speed of 400 rpm using a ThermoMix®C. Sonification was performed for 10 pulses at 30% power. Sonification was performed for 5 pulses at 30% power. The protein concentration of denatured proteins in deparaffinized, reversed formalin fixed samples was determined by the Pierce TM BCA Protein assay kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. 20 μg of protein for each tissue lysate were used for tryptic digestion. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 60°C for 30 minutes. Cysteine 31 residues were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes at 37°C in the dark. Reduced, alkylated proteins were bound to SP3 beads at a bead/protein ratio of 10:1 (wt/wt) for 18 minutes at 400 rpm. The supernatant was removed, and beads were washed 2 times with 200 µl ACN and 2 times with 70% ethanol respectively. Tryptic digestion was performed for 16 hours at a Trypsin/Protein Ratio of 1:100 in 50mM AmbiCa. Prior to mass spectrometric analyses, peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 1 µg/µl. 1 µg was used for LC-MS/MS acquisition. Liquid-chromatography-coupled to tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) measurements were performed on a quadrupole- orbitrap MS (Qexactive, Thermo Fisher) coupled to a nano-UPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system, Thermo Fisher). Chromatographic separation of peptides was achieved with a two-buffer system (buffer A: 0.1% FA in water, buffer B: 0.1% FA in ACN). Attached to the UPLC was a peptide trap (180 µm × 20 mm, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size, Symmetry C18, Waters) for online desalting and purification followed by a 25-cm C18 reversed-phase column (75 µm × 200 mm, 130 Å pore size, 1.7 µm particle size, Peptide BEH C18, Waters). Peptides were separated using an 80-min gradient with linearly increasing ACN concentration from 2 % to 30 % ACN in 65 minutes. Eluting peptides were ionized using a nano-electrospray ionization source (nano-ESI) with a spray voltage of 1800, transferred into the MS and analyzed in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. For each MS1 scan, ions were accumulated for a maximum of 120 ms or until a charge density of 2x105 ions (AGC Target) was reached. Fourier-transformation based mass analysis of the data from the orbitrap mass analyzer was performed covering a mass range of 400-1300 m/z with a resolution of 120000 at m/z = 200. Peptides with charge states between 2+ - 5+ above an intensity threshold of 1000 were isolated within a 1.6 m/z isolation window in Top Speed mode for 3 s from each precursor scan and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 30 % using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). MS2 scanning was performed, using an ion trap mass analyzer at a rapid scan rate, covering a mass range of 380-1500 m/z and accumulated for 60 ms or to an AGC target of 1x105. Already fragmented peptides were excluded for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were searched against a reviewed human FASTA database, obtained in August 2021, using the SEQUEST algorithm, implemented in the Thermo Proteome Discoverer Software in version 2.4.1.15. Peptides with a minimal precursor mass of 250 Da and a maximum mass of 5000 Da were considered. A minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids and a maximal length of 144 amino acids was selected. 2 missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. At MS2 level, the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02. The carbamidomethylation of Cys residues was set as a fixed modification. As dynamic modifications at the peptide terminus the conversion of Gln to pyro-Glu was selected. Met-loss, acetylation and acetylation after met-loss were considered as dynamic modifications at the protein terminus. The oxidation of Met residues was considered as a general dynamic modification. The Percolator algorithm was used for the discrimination between correct and incorrect spectrum identifications. For validity filtering a strict FDR < 0.01 was selected. Concentrated Target/Decoy selection was applied. For resulting MSF files, feature mapping between samples was applied within a retention time shift of maximal 5 minutes. The signal to noise threshold was set to 5.

### Publication Abstract
Intraocular medulloepithelioma (IO-MEPL) is a rare embryonal ocular neoplasm, prevalently occurring in children. IO-MEPLs share histomorphological features with CNS embryonal tumors with multilayered rosettes (ETMRs), referred to as intracranial medulloepitheliomas. While Sonic hedgehog (SHH) and WNT signaling pathways are crucial for ETMR pathogenesis, the impact of these pathways on human IO-MEPL development is unclear. Gene expression analyses of human embryonal tumor samples revealed similar gene expression patterns and significant overrepresentation of SHH and WNT target genes in both IO-MEPL and ETMR. In order to unravel the function of Shh and Wnt signaling for IO-MEPL pathogenesis in vivo, both pathways were activated in retinal precursor cells in a time point specific manner. Shh and Wnt co-activation in early Sox2- or Rax-expressing precursor cells resulted in infiltrative ocular lesions that displayed extraretinal expansion. Histomorphological, immunohistochemical, and molecular features showed a strong concordance with human IO-MEPL. We demonstrate a relevant role of WNT and SHH signaling in IO-MEPL and report the first mouse model to generate tumor-like lesions with features of IO-MEPL. The presented data may be fundamental for comprehending IO-MEPL initiation and developing targeted therapeutic approaches.

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, Intraocular medulloepethelioma, Mouse model, Bottom up, Hedghog signaling, Cancer

### Affiliations
Section of Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg eppendorf
University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Group of Mass Spectrometric Proteomics

### Submitter
Hannah Voß

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Hartmut Schlüter
Section of Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg eppendorf


