### Accession
PXD022708

### Title
Quantitative chemical proteomics of Leishmania mexicana

### Description
We report the first systematic study of the effect of Hsp90 inhibition on the global protein synthesis in Leishmania parasites using an integrated chemical biology approach. Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is a conserved molecular chaperone responsible for the folding of newly synthesised proteins. It is regarded as a master regulator of protein homeostasis of the cell, and its inhibition has been proposed to affect functions of a large array of its client proteins. We showed that the Hsp90 inhibition affects synthesis of many Leishmania proteins, with important chaperones and virulence factors showing an overall increased relative expression whilst many ribosomal proteins showing a down-regulation. This study defines the Leishmania parasite’s response to Hsp90 inhibition at its nascent global protein synthesis and provides a rich resource for future studies on Leishmania biology and antileishmanial drug development.

### Sample Protocol
iTRAQ labelled tryptic peptides were separated on an ekspertTM nanoLC 425 with low micro gradient flow module (Eksigent) using a YMC-Triart C18 column (12 nm, S-3 µm, 150 x 0.3 mm ID, 1/32"; Part number: TA12S03-15H0RU). A C-18 trap column (Trap-YMC-Triart 12 nm S-5 µm, 5 x 0.5 mm ID, 1/32"; Part number: TA12S05-E5J0RU) was used prior to the main separating micro-flow column. 5 µL of sample peptides were separated by mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) at a flow rate of 5 µL/minute over 87 minutes. The gradient used was the following, 3% B to 5% B (0 to 2 minutes), 5% B to 30% B (2 to 68 minutes), 30% B to 35% B (68 to 73 minutes), 35% B to 80% B (73 to 75 minutes), at 80% (75 to 78 minutes), 80% B to 3% B (78 to 79 minutes), at 3% B (79 to 87 minutes). The MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 6600 system (Sciex) in high-resolution mode. The MS acquisition time was set from gradient time 0 to 85 minutes and the MS1 spectra were collected in the mass range of 400 to 1600 m/z with 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. Further fragmentation of each MS spectrum occurred with a maximum of 30 precursors per cycle and 33 ms minimum accumulation time for each precursor across the range of 100 to 1500 m/z with ion selection +2 to +5, 500 cps intensity threshold and dynamic exclusion for 15 sec. The MS/MS spectra were acquired in high sensitivity mode as described above.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, the wiff files from the Sciex TripleTOF 6600 system were imported into MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with integrated Andromeda database search engine. The MS/MS spectra were queried against L. mexicana sequences from UniProt KB (8,524 sequences). Database search employed the following parameters: Reporter ion MS2 with multiplicity 4plex for the iTRAQ experiments and multiplicity 2plex for the iTRAQ duplex experiments, trypsin digestion with maximum 2 missed cleavages, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, maximum number of modifications per peptide set at 5, minimum peptide length of 6, and protein FDR 0.01. Appropriate correction factors for the individual iTRAQ channels for both peptide N-terminal labelling and lysine side-chain labelling as per the iTRAQ Reagent Multiplex Kit were also configured into the database search. The proteinGroups.txt file from the MaxQuant search output was processed using Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3). Potential contaminants, reverse sequences, sequences only identified by site and endogenous biotinylated proteins were filtered off. Additionally, proteins with less than 2 unique peptides identified were discarded. For each identified protein, ratios of the probe treated to probe + tanespimycin treated Reporter Intensity Corrected values or tanespimycin treated and AHA labelled Reporter Intensity Corrected values to the vehicle treated and AHA labelled Reporter Intensity Corrected values from the corresponding experiment was calculated yielding the fold change (FC). The FCs obtained for each protein were transformed into log2 scale and volcano plots were generated following a t-test on the three replicates with significant data points determined with a permutation-based FDR calculation (FDR = 0.05, number of randomizations = 250).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Durham University, Durham, UK
Durham University

### Submitter
Kalesh Karunakaran

### Lab Head
Dr Kalesh Karunakaran
Department of Chemistry, Durham University, Durham, UK


