### Accession
PXD005015

### Title
Identification of the circadian ubiquitylated proteome of Drosophila melanogaster.

### Description
Circadian clocks have evolved as time-measuring molecular devices to help organisms adapt their physiology to daily changes in light and temperature. Cycling transcription has been long hypothesized to account for the wealth of rhythmic protein abundance. However, cyclic degradation signals such as ubiquitylation could shape the rhythmic protein landscape as well. In order to document the circadian ubiquitylated proteome of Drosophila melanogaster, we took advantage of a new means of Ub purification based on in vivo biotinylation of AviTag-tagged ubiquitin by the BirA protein, the bioUb system. NeutrAvidin-bound fractions of head lysates were collected at four circadian times six hours apart and proteins were identified and quantified using a proteomic-based approach.

### Sample Protocol
The experimental design consisted of three experimental replicates of bioUb pulldowns and control (BirA) pulldowns at four (CT0, CT6, CT12 and CT18) and two (CT0 and CT18) time points, respectively. Each Neutravidin-purified sample was separated by SDS-PAGE, proteins from two gel regions (50-130kDa and >130kDa) were in-gel digested with trypsin and analysed separately by nanoLC-MS/MS with the Triple-TOF 4600 mass spectrometer (ABSciex) coupled to the nanoRSLC ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MS Data Converter software (AB Sciex) for generating .mgf data files and protein identification were performed using the MASCOT search engine (Matrix science, London, UK) against the Flybase database (release dmel-r5.43) with carbamidomethylation of cysteines set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionines and ubiquitinylation (Gly-Gly) as variable modifications. Peptide and fragment tolerance were respectively set at 20 ppm and 0.05 Da. Results were analysed with Scaffold 3.6.5 software (Proteome Software). Proteins were validated when identified with at least two unique peptides and 95 % probability levels for both peptides and proteins and only proteins absent or low abundant in controls were considered. MS raw data were processed with Skyline 2.6 software (MacCoss Lab, U Washington) using MS1 Full-Scan filtering algorithm for label-free quantification. Spectral libraries were built using Mascot .dat files and only scans within 4 min of MS/MS IDs were extracted for retention time filtering. The abundance of each validated protein was calculated as the average MS1 signal response for the three most intense tryptic peptides using the total area of the first 3 isotope peaks. All statistical analyses were performed on biological triplicates using Perseus 1.5.1.6 software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry). To determine cycling proteins, the mean of abundance profiles of replicates for each protein was fitted to 4 cosine functions implemented in Perseus with peak phases at CT0, 6, 12 and 18 (phase differences of π/2). Abundance profiles were first filtered using a value as a measure of goodness-of-fit (“distance” in Perseus) to the cycling model. The “distance” (values between 0 and 2) was deduced from the part of the variance of the experimental profile explained by the model tested. The “distance” filter was set empirically at 0.15 from a subset of cycling protein profiles detected manually. Finally, a p-value of 0.2 from Welch’s t-test between time points (CT6 versus CT18 or CT0 versus CT12 depending on phase) was used as cut-off for significance of the peak-to-peak amplitude. The more variability in the intensity of low abundance proteins among replicates and low peak-to-peak amplitude in protein rhythms implied that we use a lower stringency for p-value. The stringent cut-off of 0.15 (values between 0 and 2) was chosen for the distance, which is a more robust criterion as it is based on the mean of abundance profiles of replicates for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitylation, Proteomics, Circadian rhythm, Posttranslational regulation

### Affiliations
SICaPS, Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Univ. Paris-Saclay 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France

### Submitter
David Cornu

### Lab Head
Dr David Cornu
SICaPS, Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Univ. Paris-Saclay 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France


