### Accession
PXD003381

### Title
Structural Analysis of a Prokaryotic Ribosome Using a Novel Amidinating Cross-Linker and Mass Spectrometry

### Description
The structure of the Escherichia coli ribosome, a 2.5 MDa ribonucleoprotein complex containing more than 50 proteins, was probed using the novel amidinating cross-linker diethyl suberthioimidate (DEST) and mass spectrometry. Peptide cross-links derived from this complex structure were identified at high confidence (FDR 0.8%) from precursor mass measurements and collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation spectra. The acquired cross-linking data were found to be in excellent agreement with the crystal structure of the E. coli ribosome. DEST cross-links are particularly amenable to strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography, facilitating a large-scale analysis. SCX enrichment and fractionation were shown to increase the number of cross-link spectra matches in our analysis 10-fold. Evidence is presented that these techniques can be used to study complex interactomes.

### Sample Protocol
DEST interpeptide cross-links were also subjected to fractionation using SCX chromatography. This chromatography was directly integrated with the enrichment of DEST interpeptide cross-links. After the 300 mM salt wash of the enrichment, the mobile phases were changed to a 20 mM sodium acetate, pH 5, buffer, and a 100 min gradient from 0 to 300 or 400 mM NaCl, followed with a 10 min isocratic hold of 1000 mM NaCl, was implemented. DEST interpeptide cross-links eluting from the SCX column were collected sequentially onto 10 C18 trapping columns (Thermo Hypersil-Keystone Javelin, 1.0 mm   20 mm, Bellefonte, PA). An apparatus similar to one previously described was used to switch the flow path from one trapping column to the next every 10 min. After being desalted with 0.1% TFA in water at 0.3 mL/min for 20 min, the contents of the C18 trapping columns were sequentially eluted with a 10 min isocratic hold (flow rate 100 μL/min) of 5% aqueous mobile phase (0.1% TFA in water) and 95% organic mobile phase (0.1% TFA in ACN). The entire eluate from each trap was dried under vacuum. These fractions of the SCX were then resuspended in 0.1% TFA in water for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.  Capillary LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed using an IntegraFrit capillary trapping column packed with 1.5 cm of C18 (150 μm * 11 cm, New Objective, Woburn, MA; Magic C18, 5 μm, 200 Å, Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA), a capillary analytical column packed with 15 cm of C18 (75 μm * 15 cm, Magic C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA), an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany), and a Dionex chromatography system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). In each experiment, approximately 1 μg of tryptic digest was injected onto a trapping column to remove salts and contaminants by flushing for 10 min with mobile phase A (0.1% FA in 97:3 water/ACN) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. The flow rate was then reduced to 0.3 μL/min, effluent from the trapping column was directed to the capillary LC column, and a 100-min gradient between 0% and 35% mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ACN) was implemented. Eluting peptides were electrosprayed into an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer operating in data-dependent mode to acquire a full MS scan (300-1800 m/z) and subsequent MS/MS scans of the three most intense precursor ions. The AGC target value was set to 5 * 10^5 for MS scans and 2 * 10^5 for MS/MS scans. CID of the precursors occurred in the LTQ at 35% normalized collision energy. Isolation width was set to 2 m/z and monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled. Both the MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the orbitrap with resolution set to 30 000 and 7500, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was employed with the following settings: a 90 s exclusion duration time, maximum exclusion list of 500, and one repeat count. In addition, charge state rejection was enabled for 1+, 2+, and unassigned charge states, except when it was of interest to determine the changes in sample composition due to SCX enrichment. Because cross-linked peptides formed in these experiments tend to have a higher charge state upon ESI than non-cross-linked (linear peptide) species, rejection of low charge states from MS/MS acquisition provides a useful bias for detecting cross-links. MS/MS spectra were subjected to data reduction using Mascot Distiller (version 2.3.2.0), such that precursor masses were redetermined via interpretation of isotopic distributions and MS/MS spectra were deisotoped. Processed data were saved as .dta files then merged into .mgf files with syntax appropriate for database searching.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data contained in merged .mgf files were subsequently searched against the sequences of constitutive proteins from the E. coli 30S and 50S ribosomal subunits for interpeptide cross-links using the web interface of xQuest (version 2.721). This is an algorithm that can be used to search for theoretical cross-links that have masses matching measured precursor masses and to subsequently assign the fragment masses of MS/MS spectra. In its interpretation of MS/MS spectra, xQuest assumes that a cross-link precursor will fragment at only one peptide bond. For our searches, xQuest was used with default settings, except that MS tolerance was set to 5 ppm, the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.01 m/z, variable modification was set for methionine oxidation (15.9949), no fixed modifications were used, and mass shifts for cross-linking products were manually set to 136.10005 for the “xlink mass-shift” and 154.11061 (ADE), 199.10308 (TEDE), and 257.17394 (Tris dead-end) for the “monolink mass-shifts”. Matches from all searches were required to have precursor mass errors e4.3 ppm and g15% of the ion current in a given MS/MS spectrum assigned as b- and y-type ions. This value was found acceptable, since xQuest does not include ammonia and water loss fragment ions in its scoring. MS/MS matches were also required to have normalized cross-correlation scores g0.052 for both ion series containing and not containing the cross-link mass shift.

### Publication Abstract
The structure of the Escherichia coli ribosome, a 2.5 MDa ribonucleoprotein complex containing more than 50 proteins, was probed using the novel amidinating cross-linker diethyl suberthioimidate (DEST) and mass spectrometry. Peptide cross-links derived from this complex structure were identified at high confidence (FDR 0.8%) from precursor mass measurements and collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation spectra. The acquired cross-linking data were found to be in excellent agreement with the crystal structure of the E. coli ribosome. DEST cross-links are particularly amenable to strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography, facilitating a large-scale analysis. SCX enrichment and fractionation were shown to increase the number of cross-link spectra matches in our analysis 10-fold. Evidence is presented that these techniques can be used to study complex interactomes.

### Keywords
Diethyl suberthioimidate, Dest, Ribosome, Amidination, Mass spectrometry, E. coli, Protein cross-linking

### Affiliations
SOIC
Department of Chemistry, Indiana University

### Submitter
Chao Ji

### Lab Head
Dr James P. Reilly
Department of Chemistry, Indiana University


