### Accession
PXD026599

### Title
A phosphoproteomic approach reveals that PKD3 controls PKA-mediated glucose and tyrosine metabolism

### Description
Members of the Protein Kinase D (PKD) family (PKD1, 2, and 3) integrate hormonal and nutritional inputs to regulate complex cellular metabolism. Despite the fact that a number of functions have been annotated to particular PKDs, their molecular targets are relatively poorly explored. PKD3 promotes insulin sensitivity and suppresses lipogenesis in the liver of animals fed a high-fat diet. However, its substrates are largely unknown. Here we applied proteomic approaches to determine PKD3 targets. We identified over three-hundred putative targets of PKD3. Further, biochemical analysis revealed that PKD3 regulates cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) activity, a master regulator of the hepatic response to glucagon and fasting. PKA regulates glucose, lipid, and amino acid metabolism in the liver, by targeting key enzymes in the respective processes. Among them  the PKA targets phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) catalyzes the conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine Consistently, we showed that PKD3 is activated by glucagon and promotes glucose and tyrosine levels in hepatocytes

### Sample Protocol
Gel electrophoresis  Protein precipitation was performed overnight at -20°C with fourfold volume of acetone. Pellets were washed three times with acetone at -20°C.  Precipitated proteins were dissolved in NuPAGE® LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies), reduced with 50 mM DTT at 70 °C for 10 minutes and alkylated with 120 mM Iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 minutes. Separation was performed on NuPAGE® Novex® 4-12 % Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) with MOPS buffer according to manufacturer’s instructions. Gels were washed three times for 5 min with water and stained for 45 min with Simply Blue™ Safe Stain (Life Technologies). After washing with water for 2 h, each gel lane was cut into 16 slices.  In-Gel Digestion The excised gel bands were destained with 30 % acetonitrile in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8), shrunk with 100 % acetonitrile, and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, Germany). Digests were performed with 0.1 µg trypsin per gel band overnight at 37 °C in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8). After removing the supernatant, peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5 % formic acid, and extracted peptides were pooled with the supernatant.  NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm x 150 µm ID, New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch) and separated with a 30-minute linear gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 500 nl/min.  Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS scans and 15,000 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision energy was applied.  A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 seconds was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 seconds; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with AGC a target value of 2e5 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.2 [1]. Database search was performed with Andromeda, which is integrated in the utilized version of MaxQuant. The search was performed against the UniProt Mouse database. Additionally, a database containing common contaminants was used. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with 3 allowed miscleavages.  Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (1% FDR on protein and peptide level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Gln) and oxidation (Met). Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification. For protein quantitation, the LFQ intensities were used [2]. Proteins with less than two identified razor/unique peptides were dismissed.    Further data analysis was performed using R scripts developed in-house. For discrimination of unspecifically enriched proteins LFQ intensities were calculated. Missing LFQ intensities in the control samples were imputed with values close to the baseline. Data imputation was performed with values from a standard normal distribution with a mean of the 5% quantile of the combined log10-transformed LFQ intensities and a standard deviation of 0.1. For the identification of significantly enriched proteins, boxplot outliers were identified in intensity bins of at least 300 proteins. Log2 transformed protein ratios of sample versus control with values outside a 1.5x (potential) or 3x (extreme) interquartile range (IQR), respectively, were considered as significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Primary mouse hepatocytes, Pka, Pkd3

### Affiliations
PhD Student
nencki institute of experimental biology

### Submitter
Angel Loza Valdes

### Lab Head
Dr Grzegorz Sumara
nencki institute of experimental biology


