### Accession
PXD008410

### Title
PI3Kinase Isoforms in Pancreatic cancer

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is one of the most lethal cancers, with a 5 year-survival rate below 5%. Lack of curative treatment and failure of targeted therapies urge the need to identify novel efficient therapeutic strategy. Achievement of this goal will be obtained through the identification of diagnosis and prognosis biomarkers, identification of novel therapeutic targets and the knowledge of resistance mechanisms induced by these targeted therapies. PI3K/Akt/mTOR signalling, one of the most altered in cancers, is overactivated in pancreatic cancer and correlated with poor prognosis. In the Vertebrates, the family of class I phosphoinoitide-3-kinase (PI3K) includes four isoforms: p110α, p110β, p110δ and p110γ. Although they all perform the same biochemical reaction (phosphorylation of PIP2 in PIP3, a membrane lipid messenger), each isoform were demonstrated to have specific physiological roles.  Global PI3K inhibitors are currently being tested in phase I/II clinical trials in advanced solid cancers, but show at maximal doses tolerated a limited therapeutic benefit. Isoform-selective PI3K inhibitors are currently the most promising agents because, at low doses, they are more efficient to inhibit one PI3K isoform, and thus, less toxic than pan-PI3K inhibitors.  The objectives of this thesis are to determine isoform-specific PI3K roles and the therapeutic interest to target one or more isoforms in pancreatitis and PDAC, by the identification of isoform-specific pathways and the study of adaptive responses induced by targeting of one or all isoforms of PI3K.  In a first part, my work has highlighted, validated and completed results obtained in the team, to demonstrate the significance of PI3K/Akt signalling in two physiological processes: chronic pancreatitis and initiation of pancreatic carcinogenesis. Precisely, the overactivation of PI3K/Akt pathway measured on human and murine chronic pancreatitis samples is correlated with a specific p110α activation gene expression signature. Moreover, genetic and pharmacologic inactivation of p110α during pancreatic chronic inflammation or cancerogenesis (by oncogenic Kras) prevents the formation of acino-ductal metaplasia, structures at the origin of pancreatic carcinogenesis initiation. Development of in vitro acino-ductal transdifferentiation protocol allowed me to demonstrate that only p110α is necessary at this initial step of pancreatic carcinogenesis by the regulation of Rho small GTPases, further regulating actin remodelling.  In the second part, by a phosphoproteomic-based approach, I quantified PI3K downstream phosphorylation-regulated targets in a pancreatic cancer cell line treated or not by a pan- or selective PI3K inhibitor at different times. I demonstrated for the first time existence of targets, signalling pathways and adaptive responses regulated by each PI3K isoform.  To conclude, all these results demonstrate the rational of combinatorial use of isoform-specific PI3K inhibitors in patients with pancreatic cancer for better clinical response

### Sample Protocol
Human pancreatic cancer cells Capan-1 were lysed on the plate with 2 mL of lysis buffer (Tris-HCl 100mM - pH 7.8, SDS 1%, EDTA 5mM - pH7.8, proteases and phosphatases inhibitors containing 1X cOmplete Roche proteases inhibitors cocktail, NaF 10 mM, NaPPi 10 mM and Na3VO4 10mM during 30min at 4°C in dark. Cells were scraped, harvested and incubated 20min at 57°C. Every 10min, lysates were vortexed. To eliminate DNA-dependent viscosity, samples were sonicated (amplitude 40%, pulse 1sec, interval 1sec during 60sec). Three other lysis buffers were also tested (Buffer 1 : NH4HCO3 100mM pH7.8, Urea 8M; Buffer 2 : Tris-HCl 100mM pH7,8, Urea 8M; Buffer 3/RIPA :  Tris-HCl 50mM, NaCl 150mM, Nonidet P-40 1% pH 7,8, SDS 0,1% (w/v)); the chosen buffer allowed the better extraction of phospho-tyrosine proteins as assessed by Western blotting with anti-pY (p-Tyr100) antibody as compared to in gel 1-DE profile. Cell lysates were then cleared from insoluble fraction by centrifugation at 10,000xg for 15 min at 25°C, and protein concentration was measured by 2-D Quant kit. For each biological replicate, light and heavy lysates were mixed at a 1:1 ratio for a total amount of 6mg. Protein samples were reduced with 100mM DTT for 35min at 57°C and then handled according to the FASP (Filter Aided Sample Preparation) digestion protocol (Wiśniewski JR Nature methods 2009) using Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter device (10kDa cutoff, MILLIPORE, UFC901096). Protein was digested with 200µg of trypsin in a total volume on 3mL. The 1st step consisted in the replacement of  SDS by urea , then a dilution with UA buffer (Tris-HCl 100mM – pH 8.5, Urea 8M and an alkylation with CAA solution (Tris-HCl 100mM pH 8.5, Urea 8M, Chloroacetamide 50mM). For optimization of trypsin efficiency, urea concentration was decreased at 200mM with Ammonium Bicarbonat buffer ABC buffer (NH4HCO3 0,05M and 10mM phosphatase inhibitors as precedently used). In a 2nd step, Trypsin digestion was performed at 1:50 (w/w) trypsin:protein ratio overnight at 37°C on the Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter. Tryptic peptides were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), cleared at 5,000rpm for 15 minutes at 15°C, and desalted using C18 Sep-Pak plus cartridges. Resin was conditioned with 15mLin 80% Acetonitrile (ACN) then equilibrated with 15mL in 0.1% TFA. After the loading step, sample was washed with 15mL in 0.1% TFA,  and the elution was performed with 4mL in 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Eluted peptides were lyophilized with a speed-vacuum over-night.  Protocol for the enrichment with TiO2 beads is based on Larsen and al., Mol Cell Proteomics, 2005 and Jensen SS and al., Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom., 2007. In details, dried peptide pellets were resuspended in 1ml of Titansphere TiO2 blocking buffer (80% ACN, 0.1% TFA, 20mg/mL Glycolic acid, loaded onto eppendorf tube containing TiO2 using a Tio2 beads/peptides ratio equal to 4, w/w (i.e. 6mg of peptides for 24mg of TiO2 beads and incubated 45min at room temperature under agitation. In advance, the TiO2 beads were washed twice with 2ml of 0.5% NH4OH, 40% ACN pH5 (first washing) and 2ml of 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA (second washing), and were incubated with blocking buffer. The bound peptides were eluted twice with 400µl elution buffer (0,5% NH4OH, 4% ACN pH 10.5). To eliminate residual beads, the TiO2 eluates were injected on C8 columns, then eluted with 400µl of 80% ACN, 1% TFA, and were finally splitted in two fractions (10% of the volume was used for TiO2 enrichment fraction and 90% for phosphotyrosine enrichment, as described hereafter) and were dried with a speed-vacuum. During optimization steps, 20mg/mL lactic acid, and 20mg/mL Glycolic acid, and  5mg/mL DHB were compared for their ability to give the best enrichment of phosphopeptides over total peptides, according to Ayral UK and al., Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom, 2010 ;  Glycolic acid was finally chosen as the best blocking agent. Phospho-Tyrosine enrichment was performed as recommended by the supplier (PTMScan Phospho-Tyrosine Mouse mAb (P-Tyr-100). TiO2 enriched dried peptides pellets were resuspended in 350µl of IAP buffer (50mM MOPS/NaOH, 10mM Na2HPO4, 50mM NaCl pH 7.2-7.4), sonicated and pH was controlled (neutral pH 6).  After four washing of beads with 1x PBS, 5.4mg of TiO2-enriched peptides were incubated with 18µl of beads over-night at 4°C under agitation, PTMScan® Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000). After 1min of 2700g centrifugation, the supernatant (flowthrough, FT) was removed. Phospho-tyrosine peptides were eluted twice with 100µl of 0.15% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), the two eluates were combined and the resulting sample was dried in a speed-Vac.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, raw data files were processed in Proteome Discover 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against SwissProt human fasta database of Mascot  (2014-06, sprot_20140428.fasta, 542782 sequences, high and medium confidence, Q-value = 0.5-0.1). Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance set to 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance set to 0.6Da and a maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2. Static modifications was limited to carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of N-term protein, phosphorylations of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues, isotopomeric labelled lysine (+8.014199 Da) and isotopomeric labeled arginine (+10.008269 Da +8.014199 Da). Peptides were further filtered using Mascot significance threshold S/N = 1.5 and a FDR <0.01 based on q-Value (Percolator). Phospho-site localization probabilities were calculated with phosphoRS 3.1 (maximum PTMs per peptide 10, maximum position isoforms 200).   Phosphoproteomic data analysis  Phosphopeptides filtered with Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (see criteria above) were isolated from peptides. Median of all median of heavy area was calculated to determine a normalising factor between each biological replicates at the two time of treatment (correction factor = median divided by median of all median). Indeed median of heavy samples (starved untreated cells) across all time and biological replicates is not statistically changed and only 6 phosphopeptides were found significantly variant. Light and Heavy areas were further converted in normalised areas allowing statistical comparisons across all conditions at once. Phosphopeptides simultaneously identified and quantified in heavy and light conditions (script in C language), were organised in a list of unique common phosphopeptides in all conditions at 10min and 24h and were selected for analysis. Ratios of normalised Light area/ normalised Heavy area for each replicates and conditions were centred on FBS/NT condition for identification of phosphopeptides which quantity is varying in a given condition as compared to stimulated FBS condition (centred FBS+inhibitor/NT≥ 1.4 or ≤0.7). Phosphopeptides which quantities were unchanged were identified. Only the changed ratios were processed for further analysis. Then, values were centred in line to the highest value for each phosphopeptide. Principle component analysis (PCA, XLSTAT module of excel, ascendant hierarchical clustering with Euclidian distance and Ward’s method) was applied. A binary matrix allowed us to allocate these classes of ratios as decreased, increased in each condition if its FBS/NT-centred value was ≥1.4 or ≤ 0.7.  Data representations were performed with bioinformatics tools: Venn diagrams (bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be) and PCA (XLSTAT – excel module). Biological functions enrichment was collected with AutoCompare ZE software (Ycart B and al., J Biomed Inform, 2014) updated in april 2017 with 14637 biological functions from MSigDB version 6.0 (software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb), 1893 biological functions from Reactome (reactome.org/). Comparison of results between all conditions was performed by nwCompare-Julia (Pont F and al., Proteomics, 2010 - sites.google.com/site/fredsoftwares/products/nwcompare---julia). Software called "FindPTM" has been developed to localize phosphates or any other post traductionnal modifications (PTM) positions in proteins sequences starting from the PTMs positions in peptides sequences and the proteins accession numbers. FindPTM align peptides sequences on their corresponding proteins sequences and calculates the PTMs positions on the proteins sequences. FindPTM output is directly compatible with KEA2 software for phosphosites analysis. The software is free software released under the GNU General Public License (www.gnu.org/licenses) and available at: sites.google.com/site/fredsoftwares/products/findptm. Empirical kinases were determined using Kinase Enrichment Analysis 2 (KEA2) online software (www.maayanlab.net/KEA2/).

### Publication Abstract
The PI3K pathway is highly active in human cancers. The four class I isoforms of PI3K are activated by distinct mechanisms leading to a common downstream signaling. Their downstream redundancy is thought to be responsible for treatment failures of PI3K inhibitors. We challenged this concept, by mapping the differential phosphoproteome evolution in response to PI3K inhibitors with different isoform-selectivity patterns in pancreatic cancer, a disease currently without effective therapy. In this cancer, the PI3K signal was shown to control cell proliferation. We compared the effects of LY294002 that inhibit with equal potency all class I isoenzymes and downstream mTOR with the action of inhibitors with higher isoform selectivity toward PI3K&#x3b1;, PI3K&#x3b2;, or PI3K&#x3b3; (namely, A66, TGX-221 and AS-252424). A bioinformatics global pathway analysis of phosphoproteomics data allowed us to identify common and specific signals activated by PI3K inhibitors supported by the biological data. AS-252424 was the most effective treatment and induced apoptotic pathway activation as well as the highest changes in global phosphorylation-regulated cell signal. However, AS-252424 treatment induced reactivation of Akt, therefore decreasing the treatment outcome on cell survival. Reversely, AS-252424 and A66 combination treatment prevented p-Akt reactivation and led to synergistic action in cell lines and patient organoids. The combination of clinically approved &#x3b1;-selective BYL-719 with &#x3b3;-selective IPI-549 was more efficient than single-molecule treatment on xenograft growth. Mapping unique adaptive signaling responses to isoform-selective PI3K inhibition will help to design better combinative treatments that prevent the induction of selective compensatory signals.

### Keywords
Pi3k signaling pathway isoforms

### Affiliations
IPBS CNRS
Centre de Recherches en Cancérologie de Toulouse; INSERM U1037, team 17 PI3K isoforms, signalling and cancerogenesis

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Mouton Barbosa

### Lab Head
Dr Guillermet Julie
Centre de Recherches en Cancérologie de Toulouse; INSERM U1037, team 17 PI3K isoforms, signalling and cancerogenesis


