### Accession
PXD040514

### Title
Analysis of Lysine Lactylation in CD4+ T cells of normal and EAU mouse

### Description
Primary CD4+ T cells were isolated from normal and EAU mice spleens and used for lactylome analysis.

### Sample Protocol
CD4+ T cells isolated from normal and EAU mice were sonicated by ultrasonic processor in lysis buffer. Then the protein solution was digested with trypsin two times. Tryptic peptides were soaked in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and then incubated with prewashed beads (PTM-1404, PTM Bio) at 4 °C overnight to enrich Kla modified peptides. Trifluoroacetic acid (0.1%) was used to elute the bound peptides. The bound peptides were eluted using trifluoroacetic acid (0.1%). For LC-MS/MS analysis, the eluted peptides were vacuum-dried and desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore). Jingjie PTM Biolabs (Hangzhou, China) provided assistance with the LC-MS/MS analysis. Tryptic peptides were resolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water) and then separated by the Nano Elute HPLC system (Bruker Daltonics) at a flow rate of 450nL/min. The peptides were exposed to a capillary source before being subjected to mass spectrometry using timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0) processed the MS/MS data. The human SwissProt database (20422 items) and reverse decoy database were used to search tandem mass spectra. FDR<1%. By centralizing the signal intensity levels across many samples, the relative quantitative values of changed peptides were determined. After filtering lysine Kla sites (localization probability >0.75), two experiments were used to determine the relative quantitative values of each sample. All of the quantified lysine Kla peptide ratios were adjusted in accordance with the respective protein expression levels. The KEGG and GO database was used to annotate the protein pathways.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lactylation; cd4+ t cell; eau

### Affiliations
The first affiliated hospital of Chongqing Medical University
The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University

### Submitter
Shengping Hou

### Lab Head
Dr Shengping Hou
The first affiliated hospital of Chongqing Medical University


