### Accession
PXD036456

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic analysis reveals omega-3 fatty acids to counteract endotoxin-stimulated metabolic dysregulation in porcine enterocytes

### Description
Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFA), such as the eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), are reported to beneficially affect intestinal immunity. The intestinal epithelial layer (IEL), made up of absorptive cells as the enterocytes, is the primary site of fatty acid absorption. So far, the biological pathways modulated by n-3 PUFA in IEL during infection remain elusive. In the present study, shotgun proteomics analysis integrated with RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) technology was employed to unveil the proteomic changes induced by n-3 PUFA in enterocytes, in the presence and absence of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stress conditions. A total of 33, 85, and 88 differential proteins were identified in the IPEC-J2 cells exposed to (i) n-3 PUFA (DHA:EPA, 1:2, 10 µM, 24 h), (ii) LPS (10 µg/mL, 24 h), or (iii) n-3 PUFA pre-treatment followed by LPS stimulation, respectively. Functional annotation and pathway analysis of the differential proteins revealed the modulation of central carbon metabolism, including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, pentose phosphate pathway, and oxidative phosphorylation. Specifically, LPS caused metabolic dysregulation in the IPEC-J2 cells, abated upon prior treatment with n-3 PUFA. Indeed, n-3 PUFA supplementation facilitated enterocyte development and lipid homeostasis. This work provided a comprehensive picture of the biological pathways modulated by n-3 PUFA in enterocytes, both in the absence and presence of a state of endotoxin-induced metabolic dysregulation. Our findings provide important insights into the role of n-3 PUFA in the intestinal barrier, which could support better planning of nutritional strategies in managing intestinal health and immunity.

### Sample Protocol
IPEC-J2 cell lines were collected after each treatment. Briefly, the cells were seeded at a density of 1.5 × 106 in 75 cm2 culture flasks to obtain a monolayer with 80% confluency after 24 h. Cells were then treated with or without DHA:EPA (1:2 ratio, 10 µM) (Sigma-Aldrich, Milan, Italy), and reconstituted in DMEM media with 0.05% FBS for 24 h. Subsequently, cells were challenged with LPS (10 µg/mL) (Sigma-Aldrich, Milan, Italy) in DMEM media for 24 h. Cells without any treatment were included as controls. Each treatment group was composed of four biological replicates. Each treatment group was composed of four biological replicates. Cells in the culture flask were harvested in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT), 1x protease inhibitor) and incubated at 95°C for 15 min. Subsequently, cell samples were sonicated for 10 min and then centrifuged at 15,000 x g for the same time.  In brief, protein samples were subjected to reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol as described earlier (1-2). (1) Pisanu S, Cacciotto C, Pagnozzi D, Puggioni GMG, Uzzau S, Ciaramella P, et al. Proteomic changes in the milk of water buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis) with subclinical mastitis due to intramammary infection by Staphylococcus aureus and by non-aureus staphylococci. Sci Rep. 2019;9(1):15850. (2) Pisanu S, Cubeddu T, Cacciotto C, Pilicchi Y, Pagnozzi D, Uzzau S, et al. Characterization of paucibacillary ileal lesions in sheep with subclinical active infection by Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis. Vet Res. 2018;49(1):117. Finally, the peptide mixtures were dried and reconstituted in 0.2% formic acid to a final concentration of 2 µg/µL. The concentration of the peptide mixtures was estimated by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm in a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) with MassPREP E. coli Digest as the standard (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Peptide analysis was carried out using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific) as described earlier (1-2).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4, Thermo Scientific) with Sequest-HT as the search engine. Raw files were processed with the following parameters: Database UniprotKB: taxonomy Sus scrofa (Taxon identifier: 9823, 120, 707 sequences, release_2021_03); Enzyme: trypsin, with two missed cleavages allowed; Precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; Charge states: +2, +3, and +4; Static modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; Dynamic modification: methionine oxidation and acetylation (Acetyl), loss of Methionine (Met-loss) and loss of Methionine-loss+Acetylation (Met-loss+Acetyl) on N-Terminal. Protein significance and peptide validation (false discovery rate: FDR < 1%) were performed with the percolator algorithm. Differential analysis was performed by comparing each experimental group against the control. A consensus workflow was set on the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 to evaluate the precursor ions by label-free quantification (LFQ) (1).

### Publication Abstract
Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFA), such as the eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), are reported to beneficially affect the intestinal immunity. The biological pathways modulated by n-3 PUFA during an infection, at the level of intestinal epithelial barrier remain elusive. To address this gap, we investigated the proteomic changes induced by n-3 PUFA in porcine enterocyte cell line (IPEC-J2), in the presence and absence of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stress conditions using shotgun proteomics analysis integrated with RNA-sequencing technology. A total of 33, 85, and 88 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were identified in cells exposed to n-3 PUFA (DHA:EPA), LPS, and n-3 PUFA treatment followed by LPS stimulation, respectively. Functional annotation and pathway analysis of DAPs revealed the modulation of central carbon metabolism, including the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, pentose phosphate pathway, and oxidative phosphorylation processes. Specifically, LPS caused metabolic dysregulation in enterocytes, which was abated upon prior treatment with n-3 PUFA. Besides, n-3 PUFA supplementation facilitated enterocyte development and lipid homeostasis. Altogether, this work for the first time comprehensively described the biological pathways regulated by n-3 PUFA in enterocytes, particularly during endotoxin-stimulated metabolic dysregulation. Additionally, this study may provide nutritional biomarkers in monitoring the intestinal health of human and animals on n-3 PUFA-based diets.

### Keywords
Enterocytes, Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, Shotgun proteomics, Lc-ms/ms., Metabolic stress, Lipopolysaccharides, Biological dataset

### Affiliations
Porto Conte Ricerche,
Alghero, Sardinia, Italy.
Proteomics and Immunodiagnostic Lab at Porto Conte Ricerche Srl, Alghero (SS), Italy.

### Submitter
Salvatore Pisanu

### Lab Head
Dr Salvatore Pisanu
Proteomics and Immunodiagnostic Lab at Porto Conte Ricerche Srl, Alghero (SS), Italy.


