### Accession
PXD006882

### Title
Human (21d bed rest) Muscle LC-MSMS

### Description
Muscle atrophy is one of the main deleterious consequences of physical inactivity. Bed rest represents a unique model of physical inactivity and results in main changes in muscle metabolic function. However, our knowledge on the detrimental effects of bed rest still needs clarification. The aim of this study was to decipher the mechanisms involved in disuse muscle atrophy and the effects of different countermeasures in healthy men. A cross-over trial was designed, with each trial consisting in a 7-day ambulatory control period for baseline data collection, followed by 21 days head-down tilt bed rest with or without resistive vibration exercise only or combined with  nutritional (protein) supplement as countermeasures. The changes in the Vastus lateralis muscle proteome collected in the eight volunteers were characterized using mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen muscle samples were grinded under liquid nitrogen using a ball mill (MM400, Retsch, Eragny sur Oise, France) and total protein was extracted from the resulting powder using 100-200 µl of extraction buffer (8M urea, 2M thiourea , 4% CHAPS, 30mM Tris pH 8.5, protease inhibitors, TLCK; Sigma-Aldrich, Lyon, France). After solubilisation, proteins were precipitated using 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone over night at -20°C and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 15000 x g, 4°C. Resulting protein pellets were re-solubilized in extraction buffer without protease inhibitors and protein concentration was determined using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). At this stage, a sample pool comprising equal amounts of all protein extracts was made, to be injected regularly during the whole experiment and thus allow QC-related measurements. For the differential analysis, samples were pooled within experimental groups (CONT, RVE, and NEX) with each pool comprised of two patients, which were the same in BDC and HDT conditions.  50 µg of each pool (i.e. 25µg per patient) was evaporated to dryness (SpeedVac, Savant, Thermoscientific, Waltham, MA, USA), re-solubilised in sample buffer (50 mM Tris pH 6.8, 1 mM EDTA, 5% β-ME, 2.5% SDS , 10% glycerol and 0.1% Bromophenol blue), incubated at 95 °C for 5 minutes and then electrophoresed for 7 Vh at 35 V in a 4% polyacrylamide stacking gel in order to focus proteins into a single “stacked” band. For each sample, both the “stacked” protein-band and the part of the gel above this band were excised and each of them cut into four equal pieces. After de-staining, reduction and alkylation using an automatic pipetting device (MassPrep, Micromass, Waters, Milford, MA, USA), proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA; 300 ng per band) over night at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were extracted subsequently in 40% and 60 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid in water as well as 100% acetonitrile for 1 hour each at 450 rpm on an orbital shaker. Organic solvent in resulting peptide solutions was removed in a speed-vac and samples adjusted to 25µl using 0.1 % formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis. A set of reference peptides (iRT kit; Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was finally added to each sample prior to LC-MS/MS analyses for additional QC-related measurements. Samples were analysed on a nanoUPLC-system (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive plus, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Two µl of each sample was first concentrated/desalted on a trap column (Symmetry C18, 180μm x 20mm, 5 µm; Waters) using  99% of solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water) and 1% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 3 min. Afterwards, peptides were eluted from the separation column (BEH130 C18, 250mm x 75 µm, 1.7 µm; Waters) maintained at 60 °C during 150 minutes using a linear gradient from 3-40% of solvent B. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in positive ion mode with source temperature set to 250°C and spray voltage to 1.8 kV.  Full scan MS spectra (300-1800 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 140,000 at m/z 200, with a maximum injection time set to 50 ms and an AGC target value set to 3 x 106 charges. The lock-mass option was enabled (polysiloxane, 445.12002  m/z). Up to 10 most intense peptides (with a minimum of 2 charges) per full scan were isolated using a 2.2 m/z window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalised collision energy set to 27 and dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursors set to 60 seconds). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200, with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value set to 1 x 105, and the peptide match selection option was turned on. The system was fully controlled by XCalibur software (v3.0.63; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peak intensities and retention times of reference peptides were monitored in a daily fashion.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data processing was performed in MaxQuant (v 1.5.3.8). Peak lists were searched against human protein sequences, which were downloaded from SwissProt (09-07-2015; 40420 sequences, Taxonomy ID: 9606) using the MSDA software suite. Sequences of common contaminants (247 entries) were automatically using the Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant. Maxquant parameters were set as follows: MS tolerance set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search, MS/MS tolerance set to 20 ppm, maximum number of missed cleavages set to 1, Carbamidomethyl (C) set as fixed modification, and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (K) set as variable modifications. False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated based on the number of hits after searching a reverse database and was set to 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (minimum length of seven amino acids) and proteins. Data normalisation and protein quantification was performed using the LFQ (label free quantification) option implemented in MaxQuant using a “minimal ratio count” of one. “Match between runs” was enabled using a 0.7 minute time window after retention time alignment. All other MaxQuant parameters were set as default. Only proteins with at least three out of four valid values per group, and “absent” (i.e. 0 valid values) in the samples from a given group were kept for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Muscle atrophy is a deleterious consequence of physical inactivity and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. The aim of this study was to decipher the mechanisms involved in disuse muscle atrophy in eight healthy men using a 21 day bed rest with a cross-over design (control, with resistive vibration exercise (RVE), or RVE combined with whey protein supplementation and an alkaline salt (NEX)). The main physiological findings show a significant reduction in whole-body fat-free mass (CON -4.1%, RVE -4.3%, NEX -2.7%, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05), maximal oxygen consumption (CON -20.5%, RVE -6.46%, NEX -7.9%, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05), and maximal voluntary contraction (CON -15%, RVE -12%, and NEX -9.5%, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) and a reduction in mitochondrial enzyme activity (CON -30.7%, RVE -31.3%, NEX -17%, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). The benefits of nutrition and exercise countermeasure were evident with an increase in leg lean mass (CON -1.7%, RVE +8.9%, NEX +15%, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Changes to the vastus lateralis muscle proteome were characterized using mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative proteomics, the findings of which suggest alterations to cell metabolism, mitochondrial metabolism, protein synthesis, and degradation pathways during bed rest. The observed changes were partially mitigated during RVE, but there were no significant pathway changes during the NEX trial. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PXD006882. In conclusion, resistive vibration exercise, when combined with whey/alkalizing salt supplementation, could be an effective strategy to prevent skeletal muscle protein changes, muscle atrophy, and insulin sensitivity during medium duration bed rest.

### Keywords
Human, Inactivity, Atrophy, Lc-msms, Countermeasures, Muscle

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


