### Accession
PXD033998

### Title
Mice bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDC) infected by Listeria: extracellular vesicles (EVs) proteome and PTMs

### Description
In this study, we aimed to determine the role of EVs derived from Lm-infected DCs in the innate response, and the potential role of HDAC6 in DEV loading under these conditions. Our results show that Lm infection induced an elevated production of DEVs. Lm infection also altered protein sorting. Interestingly, HDAC6 deletion altered DEV protein sorting, although it did not affect acetylation of DEV-loaded proteins. However, protein ubiquitination was severely altered. Here, we show that the protein content of dendritic cells (DCs) and their secreted EVs (DEVs) vary dramatically during Lm infection. The proteomic profiles of DCs and DEV differ depending on whether HDAC6 is expressed or not.

### Sample Protocol
The EVs preparations were boiled at 95º for 5 min in the dark in the presence of a lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 1% SDS and 50 mM iodoacetamide, after which reversibly oxidized protein thiol groups were reduced with DTT and then alkylated using S-methyl methanethiosulfonate, as published. Protein extracts (100 g) were digested overnight at 37ºC in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.8 with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 1:40 (w/w) trypsin:protein ratio, using filter-assisted sample preparation technology (FASP, Expedeon, San Diego, CA, USA). The resulting peptides were desalted on C18 Oasis HLB extraction cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and dried-downPeptide samples from EVs were labelled with 4-plex isobaric tags for relative quantitation (iTRAQ, Sigma-Aldrich), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The individually labelled samples were mixed appropriately, desalted using C18 Oasis HLB extraction cartridges (Waters) and dried-down. The labeled peptide samples from EVs were taken up in 5 mM ammonium formate pH 3 with 15% acetonitrile (AcN, Sigma-Aldrich) and separated into six fractions by mixed-mode, strong cation-exchange, reversed-phase fractionation on Oasis MCX cartridges (Waters). EV samples were analyzed on an Easy nLC 1000 nano-HPLC apparatus coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San José, USA).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST (Thermo Scientific) against a Uniprot database containing all sequences from Mus musculus and Listeria monocytogenes (May 2014; 72,435 entries). Database search parameters were selected as follows: trypsin digestion with four maximum missed cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance of 800 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Additionally, Cys carbamidomethylation, Cys methylthiolation, Met oxidation, Lys acetylation and Lys ubiquitination were considered as dynamic modifications. The results were analyzed using the probability ratio method, and a false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated based on the search results against a decoy database using the refined method restricting tolerance to 15 ppm. A 1% global FDR was taken as a threshold for peptide identification. A local FDR was calculated for acetylated peptides, for which a 1% local FDR threshold was considered. Peptides were ascribed to the best protein proposed by the Proteome Discoverer algorithm.   The quantitative information from iTRAQ reporter intensities was integrated from the spectrum level to the peptide level and then to the protein level on the basis of the WSPP model using the Generic Integration Algorithm (GIA) under the SanXoT software package.

### Publication Abstract
Communication through cell-cell contacts and extracellular vesicles (EVs) enables immune cells to coordinate their responses against diverse types of pathogens. The function exerted by EVs in this context depends on the proteins and nucleic acids loaded into EVs, which elicit specific responses involved in the resolution of infection. Several mechanisms control protein and nucleic acid loading into EVs; in this regard, acetylation has been described as a mechanism of cellular retention during protein sorting to exosomes. HDAC6 is a deacetylase involved in the control of cytoskeleton trafficking, organelle polarity and cell migration, defense against <i>Listeria monocytogenes (Lm)</i> infection and other immune related functions. Here, we show that the protein content of dendritic cells (DCs) and their secreted EVs (DEVs) vary during <i>Lm</i> infection, is enriched in proteins related to antiviral functions compared to non-infected cells and depends on HDAC6 expression. Analyses of the post-translational modifications revealed an alteration of the acetylation and ubiquitination profiles upon <i>Lm</i> infection both in DC lysates and DEVs. Functionally, EVs derived from infected DCs upregulate anti-pathogenic genes (e.g. inflammatory cytokines) in recipient immature DCs, which translated into protection from subsequent infection with vaccinia virus. Interestingly, absence of Listeriolysin O in <i>Lm</i> prevents DEVs from inducing this anti-viral state. In summary, these data underscore a new mechanism of communication between bacteria-infected DC during infection as they alert neighboring, uninfected DCs to promote antiviral responses.

### Keywords
Multiplexed quantitative proteomics, Extracellular vesicles from dendritic cells, Ubiquitinilation, Acetylation, Hdac6-ko

### Affiliations
Vascular Biology and Inflammation
Centron Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares, CNIC (Masdrid, Spain).

### Submitter
Inmaculada Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús María Vázquez Cobos
Centron Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares, CNIC (Masdrid, Spain).


