### Accession
PXD002053

### Title
Breast cancer exosome protein profiling using TMT quantitation and SVM analysis

### Description
Exosomes are microvesicles of endocytic origin constitutively released by multiple cell types into the extracellular environment. With evidence that exosomes can be detected in the blood of patients with various onco-malignancies, the development of a platform that uses exosomes as a diagnostic tool has been proposed. However, it has been difficult to truly define the exosome proteome due to the challenge of discerning contaminant proteins that may be identified via mass spectrometry using various exosome enrichment strategies. To better define the exosome proteome in breast cancer, we incorporated a combination of Tandem-Mass-Tag (TMT) quantitative proteomics approach and Support Vector Machine (SVM) cluster analysis of three conditioned media derived fractions corresponding to a 10,000 x g cellular debris pellet, a 100,000 x g crude exosome pellet, and an Optiprep enriched exosome pellet. In our TMT analysis, we identified and quantified 2,179 proteins in all three fractions, with known exosomal cargo proteins displaying at least a 2-fold enrichment in our exosome fraction based on our TMT protein ratios. Employing SVM cluster analysis allowed us to classify 241 proteins as “true” exosomal cargo proteins. Annotation tools revealed breast cancer derived exosomes were enriched in plasma membrane proteins with functional roles in cell adhesion and cell immunity, in addition to several cell signaling components. This study provides a robust and vigorous framework for the future development of using exosomes as potential multi-protein marker phenotyping tool in breast cancer diagnosis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in exosome conditioned media, and three distinct fractions were isolated Fraction 1 - 10,000 x g debris pellet, Fraction 2 - 100,000 x g crude exosome pellet, Fraction 3 - Optiprep density gradient pellet. Samples were tryptically digested using the eFASP protocol. Post-digestion, samples were isobarically tagged and mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio, then SAX fractionated prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer, with a method hybridizing PQD and CID fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
MSConvert (v3.06736) was used to convert the acquired RAW files to mzML. Database searches and PSM validation were performed in the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP).36 Comet (v2014.1) was used to perform the database searches against a UniProtKB human protein database (version July, 2014; 40,826 reviewed sequences; 48,167 unreviewed sequences) with a concatenated reverse sequence decoy database.37 Search parameters include 50 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 1.0 Da fragment tolerance, variable modification: Methionine + 15.99492, and the following fixed modifications: Cysteine + 57.02510 (carbamidomethylation), N-term peptide + 229.1629, Lysine + 229.1629, (oxidation), and semi-tryptic peptides with up to three missed cleavages. PeptideProphet was used to validate the peptide search results from Comet and only peptide identifications with greater than 0.8 probability, with a calculated false positive rate < 1%, were kept for quantification. All peptides were used in ProteinProphet to infer proteins from the identified peptides and proteins with zero probability or zero quantified peptides were discarded. QuantiMORE (formerly IsoQuant) was employed to calculate the isobaric tag ratios for the validated peptides in each replicate.38 The software has been updated to include isobaric tag quantitation and is available for download at the following web address: http://www.proteomeumb.org/MZw.html (manuscript in preparation). Protein ratios were computed in the R programming language (v3.1.1) from the peptide ratios generated by QuantiMORE. The protein ratio is the average of the peptide ratios assigned by ProteinProphet and weighted by the number of quantified PSMs for each peptide. The reported protein ratios are the average and standard deviation between 2 replicates. The protein ratios were subjected to multivariate analysis using the pRoloc and MSnbase R packages.39,40 Protein ratios were rescaled using a log2 transformation, such that positive values reflect fold increases and negative values reflect fold decreases.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are microvesicles of endocytic origin constitutively released by multiple cell types into the extracellular environment. With evidence that exosomes can be detected in the blood of patients with various malignancies, the development of a platform that uses exosomes as a diagnostic tool has been proposed. However, it has been difficult to truly define the exosome proteome due to the challenge of discerning contaminant proteins that may be identified via mass spectrometry using various exosome enrichment strategies. To better define the exosome proteome in breast cancer, we incorporated a combination of Tandem-Mass-Tag (TMT) quantitative proteomics approach and Support Vector Machine (SVM) cluster analysis of three conditioned media derived fractions corresponding to a 10&#x202f;000g cellular debris pellet, a 100&#x202f;000g crude exosome pellet, and an Optiprep enriched exosome pellet. The quantitative analysis identified 2&#x202f;179 proteins in all three fractions, with known exosomal cargo proteins displaying at least a 2-fold enrichment in the exosome fraction based on the TMT protein ratios. Employing SVM cluster analysis allowed for the classification 251 proteins as "true" exosomal cargo proteins. This study provides a robust and vigorous framework for the future development of using exosomes as a potential multiprotein marker phenotyping tool that could be useful in breast cancer diagnosis and monitoring disease progression.

### Keywords
Human, Breact cancer, Tmt quantitation, Exosomes

### Affiliations
University of Maryland School of Medicine Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center
The Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
David Clark

### Lab Head
Dr Austin Yang
University of Maryland School of Medicine Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center


