### Accession
PXD004086

### Title
Characterization of the PAK4 interactome by quantitative mass spectrometry

### Description
p21-activated kinase 4 (PAK4) is a serine/threonine kinase critical during development and with a proposed role in cancer and related cellular processes, including cell proliferation, survival and migration. However, while a limited number of PAK4-interacting proteins have been identified, the PAK4 interactome has not been systematically characterized. Here, we employed iTRAQ-based quantitative mass spectrometry of PAK4-immunioprecipitations from three distinct isolated cellular fractions to comprehensively profile the PAK4 interactome in human. These data will provide a valuable resource for further investigations on the role of PAK4 in physiology and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Pull down of PAK4 and control BAP protein by flag peptide. Samples were labeled with iTRAQ for quantification and analysed by LTQ orbitrap velos. See paper for urther details.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra was matched using Sequest under the ProteomeDiscoverer platform. See paper for further details.

### Publication Abstract
p21-activated kinase 4 (PAK4) regulates cell proliferation, apoptosis, cell motility and F-actin remodeling, but the PAK4 interactome has not been systematically analyzed. Here, we comprehensively characterized the human PAK4 interactome by iTRAQ quantitative mass spectrometry of PAK4-immunoprecipitations. Consistent with its multiple reported functions, the PAK4 interactome was enriched in diverse protein networks, including the 14-3-3, proteasome, replication fork, CCT and Arp2/3 complexes. Because PAK4 co-immunoprecipitated most subunits of the Arp2/3 complex, we hypothesized that PAK4 may play a role in Arp2/3 dependent actin regulation. Indeed, we found that PAK4 interacts with and phosphorylates the nucleation promoting factor N-WASP at Ser484/Ser485 and promotes Arp2/3-dependent actin polymerization <i>in vitro.</i> Also, PAK4 ablation <i>in vivo</i> reduced N-WASP Ser484/Ser485 phosphorylation and altered the cellular balance between G- and F-actin as well as the actin organization. By presenting the PAK4 interactome, we here provide a powerful resource for further investigations and as proof of principle, we also indicate a novel mechanism by which PAK4 regulates actin cytoskeleton remodeling.

### Keywords
Pull-down, Ms/ms, Protein-protein interactions, Pak4

### Affiliations
Clinical proteomics mass spectrometry, SciLifeLab, Dept. oncology-pathology, Karolinska Institutet.
Oncology/pathology

### Submitter
Henrik J Johansson

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Clinical proteomics mass spectrometry, SciLifeLab, Dept. oncology-pathology, Karolinska Institutet.


