### Accession
PXD006199

### Title
R2TP_SILAC_FLAG-MS -  R2TP/Prefoldin-like component RUVBL1/RUVBL2 directly interacts with ZNHIT2 to regulate assembly of U5 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein

### Description
The R2TP/Prefoldin-like (R2TP/PFDL) complex is a cochaperone complex involved in the assembly of a number of critical protein complexes. Here we use stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and FLAG tag affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry to assess whether siRNA-driven knockdown of cofactors or subunits of R2TP/PFDN affects composition of U5 snRNP and TSC complex.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293 cells were grown for three weeks in minimal DMEM supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Wisent), 0.8 mM lysine, and 0.4 mM arginine. Standard isotopes 12C6,14N2 lysine and 12C6,14N4 arginine (Sigma) were used in light SILAC medium, whereas medium SILAC medium contained 4,4,5,5-D4 lysine and 13C6 arginine (Cambridge) and heavy SILAC medium was supplemented with 13C6,15N2 lysine and 13C6,15N4 arginine (Cambridge). 0.5 mM proline was added to all SILAC media to curb arginine to proline conversion. Cells were transfected with expression vectors for FLAG-tagged constructs and siRNA targeting either subunits of the R2TP/PFDN complex (RUVBL2, WDR92) or cofactors (ZNHIT2), harvested after 72 hours and frozen in liquid nitrogen. The cell pellets were thawed and membranes were disrupted in lysis buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 0.1 mM DTT, protease inhibitor cocktail) for 10 min at 4 °C on a tube rotator. Following a second liquid nitrogen freeze-thaw cycle, the soluble phase was purified by centrifugation (16,000 _g, 10 min, 4 °C) and protein concentration was determined. Lysates from heavy-, medium-labeled and unlabeled cultures were incubated separately with anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads according to a proportion of 10 _l of beads (washed twice in lysis buffer) per 1 mg of proteins. The resin was incubated for 2 h at 4 °C on a tube rotator, washed four times in 1 ml of lysis buffer and then twice in 1 ml of rinsing buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 75 mM KCl, pH 8.0). Beads from all three labeling conditions were then pooled and protein complexes were eluted by three consecutive incubations with 150 µl of fresh elution buffer (10% NH4OH, pH 12.0) for 15 min at 4 °C on a tube rotator and the eluate was dried in a speed-vac. Protein extracts were then resolubilized in 10 _l of a 6 M urea buffer. Proteins were reduced by adding 2.5 _l of the reduction buffer (45 mM DTT, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and incubating for 30 min at 37 °C, and then alkylated by adding 2.5 _l of the alkylation buffer (100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and incubating for 20 min at 24 °C in the dark. Prior to trypsin digestion, 20 _l of water were added to reduce the urea concentration to 2 M. 10 _l of the trypsin solution (5 ng/_l of trypsin sequencing grade from Promega, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to each sample. Protein digestion was performed at 37 °C for 18 h and stopped with 5 _l of 5% formic acid. Protein digests were dried down in vacuum centrifuge and stored at _ 20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Prior to LC-MS/MS, protein digests were re-solubilized under agitation for 15 min in 10 _l of 0.2% formic acid. Desalting/cleanup of the digests was performed by C18 ZipTip pipette tips (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Eluates were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge and then re-solubilized under agitation for 15 min in 10 _l of 2% ACN/1% formic acid and loaded onto a 75 _m i.d. _ 150 mm Self-Pack C18 column installed in the Easy-nLC II system (Proxeon Biosystems).  The buffers used for chromatography were 0.2% formic acid (buffer A) and 100% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid (buffer B). Peptides were eluted with a two slope gradient at a flowrate of 250 nL /min^-1.  Solvent B first increased from 2 to 40% in 82 min and then from 40 to 80% B in 28 min.  The HPLC system was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  LC-MS/MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top16 method combined with a dynamic exclusion window of 7 sec. The mass resolution for full MS scan was set to 60,000 (at m/ z^-1 400) and the lock mass option was enabled to improve mass accuracy.  The mass range was from 360 to 2000 m/ z^-1 for MS scanning with a target value at 1e6, the maximum ion fill time (IT) at 100 ms, the intensity threshold at 1.0e4 and the underfill ratio at 0.5%. The data dependent MS2 scan events were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 with the maximum ion fill time at 50 ms and the target value at 1e5. The normalized collision energy used was at 27 and the capillary temperature was 250 °C.

### Data Protocol
Quantitation was performed using the program MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2). Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin. Other parameters used were: (1) Variable modifications: Methionine oxidation and Protein N Acetylation; (2) Fixed modifications: Cysteine carbamidomethylation; (3) Database: UniProt human (version October 3, 2014); (4) Heavy and Medium Labels: R10K8 and R6K4; (5) MS/MS tolerance: 0.5 Da; (6) Minimum peptide length: 7; (7) Top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da: 6; (8) Maximum missed cleavages: 2; (9) Maximum of labeled amino acids: 3; (10). Proteins were considered quantified if they had at least one quantified SILAC pairs. Interactors of immunopurified EFTUD2-FLAG and PRPF8-FLAG were identified based on a Log2(M/L)>1. Interactions were then considered as significantly affected only when the Log2(M/H) ratio was greater than 1 or lower than -1 (2-fold change or more).

### Publication Abstract
The R2TP/Prefoldin-like (R2TP/PFDL) complex has emerged as a cochaperone complex involved in the assembly of a number of critical protein complexes including snoRNPs, nuclear RNA polymerases and PIKK-containing complexes. Here we report on the use of multiple target affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry to identify two additional complexes that interact with R2TP/PFDL: the TSC1-TSC2 complex and the U5 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP). The interaction between R2TP/PFDL and the U5 snRNP is mostly mediated by the previously uncharacterized factor ZNHIT2. A more general function for the zinc-finger HIT domain in binding RUVBL2 is exposed. Disruption of ZNHIT2 and RUVBL2 expression impacts the protein composition of the U5 snRNP suggesting a function for these proteins in promoting the assembly of the ribonucleoprotein. A possible implication of R2TP/PFDL as a major effector of stress-, energy- and nutrient-sensing pathways that regulate anabolic processes through the regulation of its chaperoning activity is discussed.

### Keywords
Human, Znhit2, Lc-msms, Hek 293, Tsc complex, U5 snrnp, Affinity purification, Flag

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Gene Transcription and Proteomics Discovery Platform, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Translational proteomics

### Submitter
Christian Poitras

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Coulombe
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Translational proteomics


