### Accession
PXD026239

### Title
Proteins that co-purify with tandem affinity-purified PRC5 in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
The project was to determine the role of a trypanosomatid protein, termed PRC5, in pre-mRNA splicing. PRC5 has no homologs in model organisms but was recurrently co-purified with known splicing factors in Trypanosoma brucei. To determine interacting proteins, PRC5 was C-terminally TAP-tagged (we used the PTP tag) and tandem affinity-purified, and co-purifying proteins identified after separation by SDS-PAGE and in-gel trypsin digest by LC/MS/MS. Many of the enriched proteins were known splicing factors, and sucrose gradient sedimentation identified a complex of five subunits, termed PRP19-related complex or PRC.

### Sample Protocol
A mix of salt-extracted and cytoplasmic proteins, derived from 3x 10^10 procyclic trypanosomes that exclusively expressed PRC5-PTP and no untagged PRC5, was subjected to PTP tandem affinity purification, following the standard protocol (Schimanski et al., 2005, Eukaryot Cell, 4, 1942-1950). The sedimentation analysis of the final eluate of a standard PRC5-PTP purification in a 4 ml linear 10-40% sucrose gradient was carried out using the protocol from Ambrosio et al.,2015(Mol Microbiol, 95, 885-901). Co-purified proteins were analyzed from a 10-20% SDS-PAGE gel lane.  Proteins of the final eluate of the standard PRC5-PTP purification were also separated by SDS-PAGE on a 10-20% PAA gradient gel and sent directly for mass spectrometric analysis of proteins associated with PRC5. In both cases, the gel lane of the final eluate was divided up into even-sized slices and sent to the Keck Biotechnology Resource Laboratory of Yale University (https://medicine.yale.edu/keck/proteomics/) where gel slices were destained and proteins, after reducing them with DTT, were alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested in-gel with trypsin. After peptide extraction, the solution was desalted and peptides purified using reverse phase C18 column. Peptides were identified by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) in an Elite Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was based on MASCOT scores and NCBI non-redundant protein sequence database of eukaryotes with oxidation (M) and propionamide (C) modification. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ±10ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.25 Da for analysis of samples after sucrose gradient and was set to 0.5 Da for direct analysis of final eluate of a standard PRC5-PTP purification.

### Publication Abstract
The pre-mRNA splicing factor PRP19 is recruited into the spliceosome after forming the PRP19/CDC5L complex in humans and the Nineteen complex in yeast. Additionally, 'PRP19-related' proteins enter the spliceosome individually or in pre-assemblies that differ in these systems. The protistan family Trypanosomatidae, which harbors parasites such as Trypanosoma brucei, diverged early during evolution from opisthokonts. While introns are rare in these organisms, spliced leader trans splicing is an obligatory step in mRNA maturation. So far, &#x223c;70 proteins have been identified as homologs of human and yeast splicing factors. Moreover, few proteins of unknown function have recurrently co-purified with splicing proteins. Here we silenced the gene of one of these proteins, termed PRC5, and found it to be essential for cell viability and pre-mRNA splicing. Purification of PRC5 combined with sucrose gradient sedimentation revealed a complex of PRC5 with a second trypanosomatid-specific protein, PRC3, and PRP19-related proteins SYF1, SYF3 and ISY1, which we named PRP19-related complex (PRC). Importantly, PRC and the previously described PRP19 complex are distinct from each other because PRC, unlike PRP19, co-precipitates U4 snRNA, which indicates that PRC enters the spliceosome prior to PRP19 and uncovers a unique pre-organization of these proteins in trypanosomes.

### Keywords
Spliceosome, Tandem affinity purification, Lc/ms/ms, Prp19-related complex, Trypanosome

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences University of Connecticut Health Center 400 Farmington Avenue Farmington, CT 06030-6403 USA Phone (860) 679-8878 Fax (860) 679-8345 E-mail gunzl@uchc.edu
UConn Health

### Submitter
Arthur Gunzl

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Gunzl
Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences University of Connecticut Health Center 400 Farmington Avenue Farmington, CT 06030-6403 USA Phone (860) 679-8878 Fax (860) 679-8345 E-mail gunzl@uchc.edu


