### Accession
PXD038986

### Title
Discovery of Novel Bilaterian Signaling Peptides Using Cone Snail Toxins

### Description
Peptide hormones and neuropeptides form a diverse class of signaling molecules that control essential processes in animals. Despite several breakthroughs in peptide discovery, many signaling peptides remain undiscovered. Recently, we demonstrated the use of somatostatin-like toxins from cone snail venom to identify homologous signaling peptides in prey. Here, we demonstrate that this toxin-based approach can be systematically applied to the discovery of other unknown bilaterian signaling peptides. Using large sequencing datasets, we searched for homologies between cone snail toxins and putative peptides from several important model organisms representing the snails’ prey. We identified and confirmed expression of five toxin families that share strong similarities with previously unknown signaling peptides from mollusks and annelids. One of the peptides was also identified in rotifers, brachiopods, platyhelminths, and arthropods, and another was found to be structurally related to crustacean hyperglycemic hormone, a peptide not previously known to exist in Spiralia. Based on several lines of evidence we propose that these signaling peptides not only exist but serve important physiological functions. Finally, we propose that the discovery pipeline developed here can be more broadly applied to other systems in which one organism has evolved molecules to manipulate the physiology of another.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly dissected cone snail venom glands were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80C until further processing. Venom glands were reconstituted and homogenized using Teflon pestles in 40 % acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Following centrifugation, supernatants were diluted 1:4 in water. The pH was adjusted to 8 in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and an aliquot of the sample was reduced using 40 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 60 minutes at 60C. An aliquot of this sample was further alkylated using 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes in the dark and digested with trypsin or chymotrypsin at 0.2 g/ml overnight at 37C.  The peptides were resuspended in 300 µL of 0.1% TFA and desalted using Pierce™ Peptide Desalting Spin Columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific Waltham, MA). The peptides were resuspended in 50 µL of 0.1% formic acid and further diluted 1:5 in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Reversed-phase nano-LC-MS/MS was performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive-HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. 2 µL of each sample were first trapped on a 2 cm Acclaim PepMap-100 column (Thermo Scientific) with 5% acetonitrile at 5 μl/min and at 5 minutes the sample was injected onto the liquid chromatograph reverse-phase Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 2.0 µm nanocolumn (Thermo Scientific). A 500 mm long/ 0.075 mm inner diameter nanocolumn heated to 35°C was employed for chromatographic separation. The peptides were eluted with a gradient of reversed-phase buffers (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in 100% water; Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.2 µL/min. The LC run lasted for 85 minutes with a starting concentration of 5% buffer B increasing to 28% buffer B over 75 minutes, up to 40% buffer B over 10 minutes and held at 90% B for 10 minutes. The column is allowed to equilibrate at 5% buffer B for 20 minutes before starting the next data acquisition. The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition MS/MS analysis mode selecting the top 20 most abundant precursor ions between 375-1650 m/z at 60,000 resolution for fragmentation at 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) and Byonic (Protein Metrics).

### Publication Abstract
Peptide hormones and neuropeptides form a diverse class of bioactive secreted molecules that control essential processes in animals. Despite breakthroughs in peptide discovery, many signaling peptides remain undiscovered. Recently, we demonstrated the use of somatostatin-mimicking toxins from cone snails to identify the invertebrate ortholog of somatostatin. Here, we show that this toxin-based approach can be systematically applied to discover other unknown secretory peptides that are likely to have signaling function. Using large sequencing datasets, we searched for homologies between cone snail toxins and secreted proteins from the snails' prey. We identified and confirmed expression of five toxin families that share strong similarities with unknown secretory peptides from mollusks and annelids and in one case also from ecdysozoans. Based on several lines of evidence we propose that these peptides likely act as signaling peptides that serve important physiological functions. Indeed, we confirmed that one of the identified peptides belongs to the family of crustacean hyperglycemic hormone, a peptide not previously observed in Spiralia. We propose that this discovery pipeline can be broadly applied to other systems in which one organism has evolved molecules to manipulate the physiology of another.

### Keywords
Venom, Conotoxin, Neuropeptide

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT
University of Utah

### Submitter
Thomas Koch

### Lab Head
Dr Helena Safavi-Hemami
Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT


