### Accession
PXD031945

### Title
Influence of immunoglobulin genotypes on the elicitation of SARS CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies

### Description
The human immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) locus is exceptionally polymorphic with high allelic diversity of variable (V) genes and structural variation affecting large regions of the locus. Thus, our germline IGHV gene and allele content is highly personal, which may influence how we respond to infections and vaccinations. Here, we coupled individualized IGHV genotyping with the isolation of monoclonal antibodies against the SARS-CoV-2 spike, focusing on the IGHV1-69 and IGHV3-30 group of genes, which were over-represented in spike-specific B cells. These genes are characterized by both allelic and copy number variations, making them ideal for expanding our understanding of inter-individual differences in antigen-specific antibody responses. We found that for the IGHV1-69*20-using CAB-I47 antibody, the allele usage was critical as germline reversion to other, highly similar, IGHV1-69 alleles abolished the neutralizing activity. Our results demonstrate that as little as single nucleotide differences between different alleles can greatly influence the biological response.

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen–deuterium exchange mass spectrometry  All chemicals were from Sigma Aldrich, pH measurements were made using a SevenCompact pH-meter equipped with an InLab Micro electrode (Mettler-Toledo), prior to all measurements a 4 point calibration (pH 2,4,7,10) was made. The HDX-MS analysis was made using automated sample preparation on a LEAP H/D-X PAL™ platform interfaced to an LC-MS system, comprising an Ultimate 3000 micro-LC coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus MS (ThermoFisher Scientific).  HDX was performed on a RDB, 0.6 mg/l with and without Fab 52 (077mg/mL) or Fab 47 (0.87 mg/mL), in 10 mM PBS, pH 7.4. For both Fab’s HDX-MS was done in one continuous run, 3 replicates were made for each state and timepoint. Each Apo state samples constituted 5 ul RDB (46 pmol total) in PBS and the epitope mapping samples constituted 5 uL RDB (46 pmol) mixed with Fab52 (48 pmol) or Fab47 (54 pmol) the samples were diluted with 30 l 10 mM PBS, pH 7,4 or HDX labelling buffer of the same composition prepared in D2O, pH(read) 7.0. The HDX labelling was carried out for t = 0, 30, 300, 3000 at 20°C. The labelling reaction was quenched by dilution of 30 l labelled sample with 30 l of 1% TFA, 0.4 M TCEP, 4 M urea, pH 2.5 at 1°C, 60 l of the quenched sample was directly injected and subjected to online pepsin digestion at 4 °C (in-house immobilized pepsin column, 2.1 x 30 mm). The online digestion and trapping was performed for 4 minutes using a flow of 50 µL/min 0.1 % formic acid, pH 2.5. The peptides generated by pepsin digestion were subjected to on-line SPE on a PepMap300 C18 trap column (1 mm x 15mm) and washed with 0.1% FA for 60s. Thereafter, the trap column was switched in-line with a reversed-phase analytical column, Hypersil GOLD, particle size 1.9 µm, 1 x 50 mm, and separation was performed at 1°C using a gradient of 5-50 % B over 8 minutes and then from 50 to 90% B for 5 minutes, the mobile phases were 0.1 % formic acid (A) and 95 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid (B). Following the separation, the trap and column were equilibrated at 5% organic content, until the next injection. The needle port and sample loop were cleaned three times after each injection with mobile phase 5%MeOH/0.1%FA, followed by 90% MeOH/0.1%FA and a final wash of 5%MeOH/0.1%FA. After each sample and blank injection, the Pepsin column washed by injecting 90 ul of pepsin wash solution 1% FA /4 M urea /5% MeOH. In order to minimize carry-over a full blank was run between each sample injection. Separated peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive Plus MS, equipped with a heated electrospray source (HESI) operated at a capillary temperature of 250 °C with sheath gas 12, auxiliary gas 2 and sweep gas 1 (au). For HDX analysis MS full scan spectra were acquired at 70K resolution, AGC 3e6, Max ion injection time 200ms and scan range 300-2000. For identification of generated peptides separate undeuterated samples were analysed using data dependent MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio X Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. (BSI, Waterloo, Canada) was used for peptide identification after pepsin digestion of undeuterated samples. The search was done on a FASTA file with only the RDB sequence, search criteria was a mass error tolerance of 15 ppm and a fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da, allowing for fully unspecific cleavage by pepsin. Peptides identified by PEAKS with a peptide score value of log P > 25 and no modifications were used to generate a peptide lists containing peptide sequence, charge state and retention time for the HDX analysis. HDX data analysis and visualization was performed using HDExaminer, version 3.1.1 (Sierra Analytics Inc., Modesto, US). Each RDB+Fab state was analysed and compared to its separate apo state run. The analysis was made on one charge state for each peptide, allowed only for EX2 and the two first residues of a peptide was assumed unable to hold deuteration. Due to the comparative nature of the measurements, the deuterium incorporation levels for the peptic peptides were derived from the observed relative mass difference between the deuterated and non-deuterated peptides without back-exchange correction using a fully deuterated sample. As a full deuteration experiment was not made full deuteration was set to 75% of maximum theoretical uptake. The presented deuteration data is the average of all high and medium confidence results. The allowed retention time window was ± 0.5 minute. Heatmaps settings were uncoloured proline, no smoothing and the difference heatmaps were drawn using automatically calculated significance based on volcano plot significance lines. The spectra for all time points were manually inspected; low scoring peptides, obvious outliers and peptides for which retention time correction could not be made consistent were removed.

### Publication Abstract
The human immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IGH) locus is exceptionally polymorphic, with high levels of allelic and structural variation. Thus, germline IGH genotypes are personal, which may influence responses to infection and vaccination. For an improved understanding of inter-individual differences in antibody responses, we isolated SARS-CoV-2 spike-specific monoclonal antibodies from convalescent health care workers, focusing on the IGHV1-69 gene, which has the highest level of allelic variation of all IGHV genes. The IGHV1-69<sup>&#x2217;</sup>20-using CAB-I47 antibody and two similar antibodies isolated from an independent donor were critically dependent on allele usage. Neutralization was retained when reverting the V region to the germline IGHV1-69<sup>&#x2217;</sup>20 allele but lost when reverting to other IGHV1-69 alleles. Structural data confirmed that two germline-encoded polymorphisms, R50 and F55, in the IGHV1-69 gene were required for high-affinity receptor-binding domain interaction. These results demonstrate that polymorphisms in IGH genes can influence the function of SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Hdx-ms, Copy number variation, Single nucleotide polymorphism, Neutralizing antibody, Immunoglobulin germline allele

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Box 280, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
BioMS - Swedish National Infrastructure for Biological Mass Spectrometry, Lund University, BMC D1330, 221 84 Lund, Sweden

### Submitter
Simon Ekström

### Lab Head
Dr Gunilla B. Karlsson Hedestam
Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Box 280, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.


