### Accession
PXD020786

### Title
Study of human gut microbiota from healthy adults

### Description
The link between the gut microbiota of a human being (a complex group of microorganism including not only bacteria but also fungi, viruses, etc.,) that form an ecosystem in his gastrointestinal tract and his physiological state is nowadays unquestionable. Metaproteomics has emerged as a useful technique to characterize this microbial community, not just taxonomically, but also focusing on specific biological processes carried out by gut microbiota that may have an effect in the host health or pathological state. In order to characterize this host-microbiota inter-relation, we carried out the metaproteomic study of 6 stool samples from 6 healthy adults. A total of 37 080 peptide sequences and 10 686 protein groups were identified in this study. Regarding taxonomic information, we found a total of 247 taxa among 105 were species. Interesting contributions of microbiota metabolism to human host physiology has also been described.

### Sample Protocol
Six stool samples were processed according to previous works, with modifications (Tanca, Palomba, Pisanu, Addis, & Uzzau, 2015; Zhang et al., 2018). Briefly, 10 mL of PBS was added to 0.5 g of stool sample and shaken 45 min at 4 ºC in a tube rotator. The samples were then centrifuged at 500 g, 4 ºC for 5 min. Supernatant was collected and this process was repeated twice. All three collected supernatants were centrifuged at 14 000 g, for 20 min at 4ºC and washed three times with PBS (centrifugation 14 000 g, 4ºC for 20 min). The pellet was resuspended in 500 µL lysis buffer (4 % SDS, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0) and incubated at 95 ºC for 10 min. Three rounds of bead beating were carried out after adding 0.3 g glass beads (0.5-0.75 mm) to the lysate. Cell debris and beads were removed through centrifugation at 16 000 g, 4ºC for 10 min and finally, the supernatant was subjected to another centrifugation (16 000 g, 4 ºC for 10 min). Proteins were in-gel digested using trypsin. Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 Trapping column (75 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 3 µm C18 resin with 100 Å pore; Thermo Scientific) using a 250 nL/ min flow rate, and then separated onto a C18 analytical column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 2 µm and 100 Å pore size. Thermo Scientific Easy Spray Column) using a 240 min gradient (2-40% Buffer B (0.1 % FA in 100 % ACN) in Buffer A (0.1 % FA). Mass spectra were acquired in a Q-Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in a Full-MS data-dependent acquisition (DDA) in a positive mode with Xcalibur 4.1 software. MS scans were acquired at m/z range of 350 to 2 000 Da followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan (with a threshold of 0.01) of the 15 most abundance precursors with charges of 2-4 in MS scans for high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a dynamic exclusion of 10 s and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 20.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra (.raw files) were processed using Metalab version 2.0 (Cheng et al., 2017) using the human microbial gene catalog (available on http://meta.genomics.cn/) (Li et al., 2014) to generate a reduced, sample-specific protein database. MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) was used for characterization (using Andromeda search engine) and quantitative analysis (using maxLFQ algorithm) of microbial peptides. For human peptide identification, human database was downloaded from Uniprot (UniProt., 2018) (downloaded 02.18.20 with 74 451 entries) and used as ‘Host database’ in Metalab search. Search parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed.

### Publication Abstract
The use of metaproteomics for studying the human gut microbiota can shed light on the taxonomic profile and the functional role of the microbial community. Nevertheless, methods for extracting proteins from stool samples continue to evolve, in the pursuit of optimal protocols for moistening and dispersing the stool sample and for disrupting microbial cells, which are two critical steps for ensuring good protein recovery. Here, we evaluated different stool sample processing (SSP) and microbial cell disruption methods (CDMs). The combination of a longer disintegration period of the stool sample in a tube rotator with sonication increased the overall number of identified peptides and proteins. Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Planctomycetes, and Euryarchaeota identification was favored by mechanical cell disruption with glass beads. In contrast, the relative abundance of Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Fusobacteria was improved when sonication was performed before bead beating. Tenericutes and Apicomplexa identification was enhanced by moistening the stool samples during processing and by disrupting cells with medium-sized glass beads combined with or without sonication. Human protein identifications were affected by sonication. To test the reproducibility of these gut metaproteomic analyses, we examined samples from six healthy individuals using a protocol that had shown a good taxonomic diversity and identification of proteins from Proteobacteria and humans. We also detected proteins involved in microbial functions relevant to the host and related mostly to specific taxa, such as B12 biosynthesis and short chain fatty acid (SCFA) production carried out mainly by members in the <i>Prevotella</i> genus and the Firmicutes phylum, respectively. The taxonomic and functional profiles obtained with the different protocols described in this work provides the researcher with valuable information when choosing the most adequate protocol for the study of certain pathologies under suspicion of being related to a specific taxon from the gut microbiota.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Metaproteomics, Human gut, Functions, Taxonomic profile

### Affiliations
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
UCM

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Concha Gil
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain


