### Accession
PXD024075

### Title
Synaptic accumulation of FUS triggers early misregulation of synaptic RNAs in ALS-FUS mice

### Description
Mutations disrupting the nuclear localization of the RNA-binding protein FUS characterize a subset of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients (ALS-FUS). FUS regulates nuclear RNAs, but its role at the synapse is poorly understood. Using super-resolution imaging we determined that the localization of FUS within synapses occurs predominantly near the vesicle reserve pool of presynaptic sites. Using CLIP-seq on synaptoneurosomes, we identified synaptic FUS RNA targets, encoding proteins associated with synapse organization and plasticity. Significant increase of synaptic FUS during early disease in a knock-in mouse model of ALS-FUS was accompanied by alterations in density and size of GABAergic synapses. mRNAs abnormally accumulated at the synapses of 6-month-old ALS-FUS mice were enriched for FUS targets and correlated with those depicting increased short-term mRNA stability via binding primarily on multiple exonic sites. Our study indicates that synaptic FUS accumulation in early disease leads to synaptic impairment, potentially representing an initial trigger of neurodegeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared by using a commercial iST Kit (PreOmics, Germany) with an updated version of the protocol. Briefly, 50 µg of proteins per sample were solubilized in ‘Lyse’ buffer, boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes and processed with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 30s setting the ultrasonic amplitude to 85%. Then the samples were transferred to the cartridge and digested by adding 50ul of the ‘Digest’ solution. After 60min of incubation at 37°C the digestion was stopped with 100 µl of Stop solution. The solutions in the cartridge were removed by centrifugation at 3800 g, while the peptides were retained by the iST-filter. Finally the peptides were washed, eluted, dried and re-solubilized in 40ul of MS-solution (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for MS-Analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 1 µl of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). After a 3 min initial hold at 5% B a gradient from 5 to 30% B in 90 min was applied. The column was cleaned after the run by increasing to 95 % B and holding 95 % B for 10 min prior to re-establishing loading condition. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (300−1’500 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 500’000. Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 0.8 Da and HCD fragmentation with 35% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 10’000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Only precursors with intensity above 5’000 were selected for MS/MS and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. Nature biotechnology 2008). Spectra were searched against a Swissprot Mus musculus reference proteome (taxonomy 10090, version from 2019-07-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values.  Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService (Wolski et al, http://github.com/protViz/SRMService) was used to filter for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing for a maximum of 6 missing values, and to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and to compute p-values using the t-test with pooled variance. If all measurements of a protein are missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Synaptoneurosomes, Fus, Neurodegeneration, Cortex, Als, Orbitrap, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Department of Quantitative Biomedicine, University of Zurich, Switzerland
Department of Quantitative Biomedicine, University of Zurich

### Submitter
Katharina Hembach

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalini Polymenidou
Department of Quantitative Biomedicine, University of Zurich, Switzerland


