### Accession
PXD021804

### Title
Identification of interaction partners of PRMT6

### Description
To identify transcription factors of PRMT6 which could recruit PRMT6 to target genes, we used affinity purification of avi-tagged PRMT6 in combination with stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) based mass spectrometry. For this, K562 cells were transduced with a lentiviral co expression vector for the BirA-ligase and avi-PRMT6 with a 21 amino acid taq, which is biotinylated in the cells. Cells expressing the BirA-ligase only served as a control. Avi-PRMT6 cells were grown in heavy SILAC medium and control cells in light SILAC medium for seven passages. Nuclear extracts were prepared from 1x108 cells and subjected to avi-PRMT6 affinity purification using magnetic streptavidin beads. Subsequently, the proteins were eluted from the beads. The eluates from the avi-PRMT6 and the control were mixed in a one to one ratio. Subsequently, we performed quantitative mass spectrometry (MS)-based analysis of the PRMT6 interactome.

### Sample Protocol
Transduced cells expressing the avi-PRMT6 protein were grown in heavy (H) SILAC medium and the control cells with avi-tag only were grown in light (L) SILAC medium. Nuclear extracts of 1 × 108 K562 avi-PRMT6 and Bio-tag only control cells were prepared. Streptavidin Beads (Dynabeads M-280, Life Technologies) were used for protein pull down of avi-tagged PRMT6 protein and avi-tag only control. The beads were washed five times (10 mM Tris (pH 7,5); 0.2 M NaCl; 10% Glycerol; 0.5 mM DTT; 0.1 % NP-40. The proteins were eluted from the beads with 27 µL 4x NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer and 3 µL 4x NuPAGE Reducing Agent at 95 °C for 5 min. avi-PRMT6 and avi-tag only control samples were combined and the protein mixture was subjected to polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The separated proteins were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue and the whole gel lane was excised as 23 individual bands, which were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. The peptide mixtures were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were first trapped on a precolumn (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH; 100 µm x 5 cm; self-packed) and then separated on an analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH; 350 x 0.075 mm; self-packed) with a 1 hour linear gradient of 2-40% solvent B [80% (vol/vol) ACN, 0.1% FA] and versus solvent A (0.1% FA in water) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL·min-1. Eluting peptides were analyzed by data-dependent acquisition using a top 30 MS/MS method with a survey scan resolution setting of 60,000 FWHM and an MS/MS resolution setting of 15,000 FWHM at 200 m/z. The 30 most abundant ions within the 350-1600 m/z range were selected for HCD with an NCE setting of 28% and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z. AGC target values and maximum ion injection times for MS and MS/MS were set to 10^6 in 50 ms and 10^5 in 60 ms, respectively. Selected precursor mass-to-charge ratio values were dynamically excluded from fragmentation for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8, MPI for Biochemistry) Fragment ion mass spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human protein database (date: November 2016) supplemented with 245 frequently observed contaminants using the integrated Andromeda search engine. The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 6 and 20 ppm after initial recalibration, respectively. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation on the protein N-terminus were considered as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as a fixed modification. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, allowing up to two missed cleavages. Both on the peptide and protein level the maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on using a forward-and-reverse concatenated decoy database approach. SILAC multiplicity was set to double labeling (Lys+0/Arg+0, Lys+8/Arg+10) requiring at least two ratio counts for peptide quantitation and enabling the “re-quantify” option.

### Publication Abstract
The establishment of cell type specific gene expression by transcription factors and their epigenetic cofactors is central for cell fate decisions. Protein arginine methyltransferase 6 (PRMT6) is an epigenetic regulator of gene expression mainly through methylating arginines at histone H3. This way it influences cellular differentiation and proliferation. PRMT6 lacks DNA-binding capability but is recruited by transcription factors to regulate gene expression. However, currently only a limited number of transcription factors have been identified, which facilitate recruitment of PRMT6 to key cell cycle related target genes. Here, we show that LEF1 contributes to the recruitment of PRMT6 to the central cell cycle regulator CCND1 (Cyclin D1). We identified LEF1 as an interaction partner of PRMT6. Knockdown of LEF1 or PRMT6 reduces CCND1 expression. This is in line with our observation that knockdown of PRMT6 increases the number of cells in G1 phase of the cell cycle and decreases proliferation. These results improve the understanding of PRMT6 activity in cell cycle regulation. We expect that these insights will foster the rational development and usage of specific PRMT6 inhibitors for cancer therapy.

### Keywords
Human, K562, Hematopoiesis, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Universität Stuttgart Institut für Industrielle Genetik Abteilung Eukaryotengenetik Allmandring 31 70569 Stuttgart Germany
Universität Stuttgart
Institut für Industrielle Genetik
Abteilung Eukaryotengenetik
Allmandring 31
70569 Stuttgart


### Submitter
Jörn Lausen

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Lausen
Universität Stuttgart Institut für Industrielle Genetik Abteilung Eukaryotengenetik Allmandring 31 70569 Stuttgart Germany


