### Accession
PXD015364

### Title
A label-free shotgun proteomics analysis of macadamia nut

### Description
In this study, we present a first proteomic overview of macadamia nut using a label-free shotgun proteomic approach and prediction of their proteins with potential allergenic activity and cross-reactivity via an in silico analysis. The defense response proteins were the most abundant group of proteins and accounted for 24% of the total abundance. The vicilin-like macadamia antimicrobial peptides 2-3 (MiAMP2) was the most abundant protein. The cascading of amino acid and carbohydrate metabolic pathways in macadamia nut were constructed and proposed for the first time. The in silico analysis revealed seed storage proteins (conglutins and vicilins), rubber elongation factor proteins, phosphate binding proteins, and detoxifying methylglyoxalases among others as proteins with allergenic and cross-reactive potential. The label-free shotgun proteomics study revealed valuable insight into the genetic and biological makeup of macadamia nut and potential proteins with predictive allergenic activity and cross-reactivity. Integration of genomics with the proteomic data will be indispensable for future molecular characterization of macadamia including allergens.

### Sample Protocol
We used the label-free shotgun proteomics approach in this study. From these data, the macadamia nut soluble proteome was processed into functional biological categories revealing varied protein and peptide distribution. These identified proteins were further processed using in silico analyses to identify protein sequence similarities to known allergens as a predictor of allergenic and cross-reactive potential.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science) and X! Tandem (the Global Proteome Machine; thegpm.org version CYCLONE) and searched against the NCBI non-redundant protein database (selected for Viridiplantae, 1530227 entries) with trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme. Mascot and X! Tandem searches were performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.40 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 2.0 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was accounted as complete modification and oxidation of methionine was accounted as variable modifications.  Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.5.3, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Keller, Kolker & Aebersold, 2003)  and Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, Nesvizhskii, Kolker and Aebersold, 2002)  were used to filter protein and peptide identifications at  ≥ 80.0% and 90% threshold probabilities respectively, such that FDRs estimations were less than 1%, with at least 1 peptide as the minimum threshold for protein identifications. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters based on shared peptide evidence. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Reproducible proteins were analyzed for total peptide counts, unique peptide counts, sequence matches, and percentage coverage. Proteins were annotated with Gene Ontology (GO) terms from NCBI, UniProt, InterPro and KEGG collectively. Identifiers with no protein annotation information were subjected to protein sequence alignment using Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) against all proteins database at NCBI to retrieve annotation information for matches with > 90% identity and expect value < 0.05. The AllergenOnline database (version 16) (Goodman et al., 2016) provided by Food Allergy Research and Resource Program (FARRP) was used to compare macadamia nut proteins identified with the NCBInr shotgun proteomics identifications, against protein sequences of publicly known allergens. The allergen-specific database contained 1956 protein sequences which belonged to 778 protein groups. Database searches were carried out with expect value cut off ≤ 0.05 and used BLOSUM50 as the scoring matrix. Only the protein identifications with a minimum of two spectrum counts in at least two of the three biological replicates were used for the screening. Macadamia proteins that matched to known allergenic proteins were further clustered based on their % shared peptide identity.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, we present a systematic proteomic overview of macadamia nut using a label-free shotgun proteomic approach. We identified 947 proteins in 723 clusters and gene ontology analysis revealed proteins across 46 functional categories including carbohydrate metabolism (10%), protein metabolic processes (5%), amino acid metabolism (4%), transport (4%), stress response (3%), lipid metabolism (3%), protein folding (3%) and defense response (1.4%). The defense response proteins accounted for 24% of the total peptide abundance. The vicilin-like macadamia antimicrobial peptides 2-3 (MiAMP2) was the most abundant protein, followed by glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 3, 11S legumin-like protein, 2-phospho-D-glycerate hydrolase and heat shock 70&#xa0;kDa protein among others. The cascading of amino acid and carbohydrate metabolic pathways in macadamia nut were constructed against reference maps from KEGG and proposed for the first time. Results were also indicative of useful protein candidates with possible allergenic potential and cross-reactivity in macadamia nut. The in-silico analysis revealed homology and linear epitope similarities to known allergens such as conglutin &#x3b2; allergen from lupin, Jug r2 vicilin allergens from walnut, Ara h3 11S globulin from peanut, small rubber particle protein Hev b3, hevein, enolase 2, HSP 70kDa Cla h4, Der f28 allergen, and methylglyoxalases. Label-free shotgun proteomics reveal valuable insights into the genetic and biological makeup of macadamia nut proteome and provide guidance on protein candidates with allergenic potential for further immunological investigation. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015364.

### Keywords
Macadamia nut; label-free shotgun proteomics; in silico analysis; allergenicity; cross-reactivity

### Affiliations
ARC Training Centre for Advanced Technologies in Food Manufacture, School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW SYDNEY, NSW 2052, AUSTRALIA
UNSW

### Submitter
sridevi muralidharan

### Lab Head
Dr N Alice Lee
ARC Training Centre for Advanced Technologies in Food Manufacture, School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW SYDNEY, NSW 2052, AUSTRALIA


