### Accession
PXD019141

### Title
Stress-induced translation inhibition through displacement of scanning initiation factors

### Description
Cellular responses to environmental stress are frequently mediated by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). Here, we examined global RBP dynamics in Saccharomyces cerevisiae in response to glucose starvation and heat shock. Each stress induced rapid remodeling of the protein:RNA interactome, without corresponding changes in RBP abundance. Consistent with general translation shutdown, ribosomal proteins contacting the mRNA showed decreased RNA-association. Among translation components, RNA-association was most reduced for initiation factors involved in 40S scanning (eIF4A, eIF4B, and Ded1), indicating a common mechanism of translational repression. In unstressed cells, eIF4A, eIF4B, and Ded1 primarily targeted the 5′-ends of mRNAs. Following glucose withdrawal, mRNAs remained stable, but 5’-binding was abolished within 30sec, explaining the rapid translation shutdown. Heat shock induced progressive loss of 5’ RNA-binding by initiation factors over ~16min, and translation shutoff provoked 5′-degradation by Xrn1, selectively for mRNAs encoding translation-related factors. These results reveal mechanisms underlying translational control of gene expression during stress.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested with trypsin as described by Schevchenko et al (1996). Briefly, proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) in ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) in ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 13 ng μL-1 trypsin (Pierce, UK). Following digestion, samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma Aldrich, UK) and spun onto StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al (2003). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 5μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). The peptide sample was then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting it to 5 μL by 0.1% TFA. MS-analyses were performed on an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK), coupled on-line, to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) assembled in an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and operated at a constant temperature of 50oC.  Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid (Sigma Aldrich, UK); mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The total run time per fraction was 190 min and for protein abundance samples was 160 min per fraction. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 150 min, then to 95% in 16 min. For protein abundance samples the gradient was 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 120 min and then to 05% in 16 min. In both cases, samples were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis under the same conditions. Specifically, survey scans were performed at resolution of 120,000 in the orbitrap with scan range 400-1900 m/z and an ion target of 4.0e5. The RF lens was set to 30% and the maximum injection time to 50ms. The cycle time was set to 3 sec and dynamic exclusion to 60 sec. MS2 was performed in the Ion Trap at a rapid scan mode with ion target of 1.0E4 and HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27 (Olsen et al, 2007). The isolation window in the quadrupole was set at 1.4 Thomson and the maximum injection time was set to 35 ms. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.6.1.0 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against Saccharomyces cerevisiae complete/reference proteome set of UniProt database (released on 14/06/2019), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). For the first search, peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while for the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification.  Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Multiplicity was set to 2 and for heavy labels Arginine 6 and Lysine 6 were selected. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR. Only proteins identified with high confidence (peptides ≥2) were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Initiation factors, Rna-binding proteins, Translation, Translational control., Glucose starvation, Mrna, Heat shock, Environmental stress

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Stefan Bresson

### Lab Head
Dr David Tollervey
University of Edinburgh


