### Accession
PXD021265

### Title
Proteomic profiling reveals CDK6 upregulation as a targetable resistance mechanism for lenalidomide in multiple myeloma

### Description
The immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) lenalidomide and pomalidomide are highly effective treatments for multiple myeloma. However, virtually all patients eventually relapse due to acquired drug resistance with resistance-causing genetic alterations being found only in a small subset of cases. Here, we performed integrated global quantitative tandem mass tag (TMT)-based proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses and RNA sequencing in five paired pre-treatment and relapse samples from multiple myeloma patients to investigate non-genetic resistance mechanisms. These analyses revealed a CDK6-governed protein resistance signature that includes myeloma high-risk factors such as TRIP13 and RRM1. Overexpression of CDK6 in multiple myeloma cell lines reduced sensitivity to IMiDs while CDK6 inhibition by palbociclib or CDK6 degradation by proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs) is highly synergistic with IMiDs in vitro and in vivo. In conclusion, we found upregulation of CDK6 to cause lenalidomide resistance in multiple myeloma that can be overcome by pharmacological intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Five multiple myeloma patients with paired pre-treatment and relapsed samples were included in the proteomics study. All samples were obtained from the iliac crest of patients and were CD138+ enriched by MACS (Miltenyi, Cologne, Germany). All patients provided written informed consent according to the Declaration of Helsinki and the study was approved by the institutional review board (IRB).MM.1S WT cells were subjected to respective treatments for either 3 h or 24 h in biological duplicates. Pomalidomide treatment was administered at a final concentration of 10 µM, while palbociclib, BSJ-03-123, and YKL-06-102 were administered at 1 µM. Control cells were treated with solvent only. Cells were pelleted and washed three times with cold 1X PBS. Global proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of patient samples and MM.1S samples were performed with quantitative mass spectrometry using isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT).In brief, samples were lysed at 4 °C with urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl) supplemented with protease inhibitors (2 µg/ml aprotinin, 10 µg/ml leupeptin 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylflourid) and phosphatase inhibitors (10 mM NaF, phosphatase inihibitor cocktail 1 and 2, Sigma Aldrich). Extracted proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark.  Sequencing grade LysC (Wako) was added at a ratio of 1:50 and after 2 h, samples were diluted 1:4 with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH8 and sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added at a ratio of 1:50. Digestion was completed overnight and subsequently acidified samples were desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cc Cartridges (Waters). Dried samples were resuspended in 10mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and peptide concentration was determined. For relative quantification of proteins in multiple myeloma patient samples, 10 µg peptides for each sample were labeled with 10-plexing tandem mass tags (TMT-10; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and combined into one TMT plex. For quantification of phosphopeptides in multiple myeloma patient samples, 150 µg of peptides for the samples 1 to 9 and 23 µg of starting material for sample 10 were labeled with TMT-10 reagents and combined into a second plex. TMT-channel annotation of patient proteomic data is available in Supplementary Table 1. For global and phosphoproteome analysis of MM.1S drug-treated cells, 200 µg peptides of each sample were labeled with 11-plexing tandem mass tags (TMT-11; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the samples were randomly distributed into two TMT plexes. For the MM.1S experiment, an internal reference sample composed of equal amounts of peptide material from all samples was included in each TMT 11-plex to provide a standard for relative quantification. TMT-channel annotation of MM.1S proteomic data is available in Supplementary Table 3. Combined TMT samples were fractionated off-line into 24 fractions using high-pH reversed phase chromatography. For analysis of the global proteome, 500 ng peptides of each fraction were analyzed with LC-MS/MS. The remaining material was pooled into 12 fractions for each plex and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment with immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) automated on an AssayMap Bravo System (Agilent).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with MaxQuant (Version 1.6.3.3)4 and searched against a human UniProt database including all Swiss-Prot entries and a database of default protein contaminants. PIF filter was set to 0.5. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of C. Variable modifications were set to M-oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini including neo protein N-terms after cleavage of first methionine. A maximum of 5 modification per peptide were allowed. N-terminal acetylation and M-oxidation were used in protein quantification (unmodified counterpart discarded). Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Analysis of MaxQuant output was performed with R(4.0.3) and R studio (Version 1.3.1093) statistical software environment. Statistical analysis in R was aided by the protigy application provided by the Broad institute on GitHub (https://github.com/broadinstitute/protigy) as used previously.5 Protein group files were filtered for reverse hits, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by site. Resulting proteins were filtered for proteins identified with at least two peptides and at least one unique peptide. Phosphoproteomic data was analyzed in a separate MaxQuant run and filtered for valid values across all samples. Due to limited protein amounts of the patient 5 diagnosis sample, patient 5 was excluded from the analysis of the phosphoproteomic data. For the analysis of multiple myeloma patient samples, log2 ratios (relapse/diagnosis) of proteins and phosphopeptides were calculated for each patient and normalized with median-MAD normalization. The processed data was analyzed with a moderated one-sample t-test (limma package)6 and subjected to reproducibility filtering: global proteome (99% confidence interval); phosphoproteome (95% confidence interval) with linear mixed effect models to remove outliers prior to applying multiple testing correction with the Benjamini-Hochberg method. As expected, the phosphoproteome showed higher variability compared to the global proteome, which is more stable towards dynamic modifications. We therefore applied a stronger outlier filter and more relaxed cutoff for the phosphoproteomic data. A cutoff of 0.1 and 0.12  FDR was implemented for global proteome (Figure 1B) and phosphoproteome (Supplemental Figure 3C) analysis of patients samples respectively. For the analysis of MM.1S drug treated cells, the log2 ratios (sample/internal standard) were calculated and normalized with median-MAD normalization. The resulting ratios were subsequently normalized to the control sample and analyzed with a moderated one-sample t-test. Resulting p-values were corrected for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg method. MM.1S phosphoproteomic data was subjected to reproducibility filtering (99% confidence interval) with Bland-Altman filtering to remove outliers prior to p-value correction. For MM1.S derived data, a 0.1 FDR significance cutoff was applied. Phosphosite plus (PSP) was used for identifying known CDK6 targets. The processed proteomics data as well as TMT channel annotation is available in supplementary tables.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Cdk6, Multiple myeloma, Tmt

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine Berlin
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin

### Submitter
Evelyn Ramberger

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Proteomics Platform, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine Berlin


