### Accession
PXD030958

### Title
Electroneutral polymer nanodiscs enable interference-free probing of membrane proteins in a lipid-bilayer environment

### Description
Membrane proteins can be examined in near-native lipid-bilayer environments with the advent of polymer-encapsulated nanodiscs. These nanodiscs self-assemble directly from cellular membranes, allowing in vitro probing of membrane proteins with techniques that had previously been restricted to soluble or detergent-solubilized proteins. Nonetheless, the high charge densities of existing polymers obstruct bioanalytical and preparative techniques through unspecific interactions. Here we describe a simple strategy for producing water-soluble, electroneutral polymer nanodiscs. Through attachment of a sulfobetaine group, the commercial polymers DIBMA and SMA can be easily converted into the charge-neutral maleimide derivatives, sulf DIBMA and sulf SMA, which readily extract proteins and phospholipids from artificial and cellular membranes to form nanodiscs. Crucially, the electroneutrality of the new nanodiscs averts unspecific interactions, thereby enabling reliable lab-on-a-chip detection of protein/lipid interactions and in vitro translation of membrane proteins. Finally, we create a library containing thousands of human membrane proteins and use proteome profiling by mass spectrometry to show the preservation of protein complexes in electroneutral nanodiscs.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were pelleted at 800 g for 10 min, resuspended in 3 mL Tris buffer supplemented with 250 mM sucrose and homogenized in a precooled Potter–Elvehjem tissue grinder (Corning, New York, USA). Cellular crude extract was centrifuged at 265’000 g for 30 min. The pellet was washed in 3 mL Tris buffer, and the centrifugation step was repeated once. The pellet was resuspended in Tris buffer 60 mg/mL (w/v), which was further diluted to 16.7 mg/mL upon addition of polymer or detergent. After overnight incubation of the solubilization mixture at room temperature on a rotary wheel, samples were centrifuged at 100’000 g and 20°C for 80 min. The supernatant containing soluble nanodiscs was fractionated by size exclusion chromatography. For this, supernatant was concentrated using Amicon tubes (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany, MW cut-off 10 kDa) to about 500 ul and applied onto a Superose 6 Increase 10/300 GL column equilibrated wit 2 CV Tris buffer (150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4). 500 μL fractions were collected, lyophilized and stored at −80°C. Precipitated SEC fractions were resuspended in 25 μL urea ABC buffer (8M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate). DTT and chloroacetamide were added sequentially to final concentrations of 12.5 mM and 25 mM, and incubated each for for 30 min at RT. Samples were diluted to 4 M urea with ABC buffer, Lys C was added (final 1:100 w/w), and the mixture was incubated at 37°C for at least 3 h. After the initial digest, the urea concentration was further diluted to 1 M, ACN and trypsin were added to a final concentration of 5% (v/v) and a trypsin/protein mass ratio of 1:100, respectively, and the mixture was incubated at 37°C for at least 12 h. Samples were acidified by addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 2% (v/v). Sample clean-up and desalting were performed following a modified version of the STAGE tipping protocol.48 To this end, STAGE tips were prepared with 2 layers of Empore C18 filter extraction discs and equilibrated with 25 mM ABC and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, which was also used for column washing after sample loading. Peptides were eluted with 80% (v/v) can containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The eluate was dried in a RVC 2-25 CD plus vacuum concentrator (Martin Christ, Osterode am Harz, Germany) at 30 mbar and 40°C for 60 min and submitted to mass spectrometry.  Mass spectrometry: Protein identification and quantification were performed on an Easy nLC 1200 HPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on reversed-phase columns (30 cm in length with an inner diameter of 75 μm; New Objective, Woburn, Massachusetts, USA) packed in house with ReproSil Pur 120 C18 AQ (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbruch-Entrigen, Germany) using buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) as mobile phases. Eluting peptides were directly injected into the mass spectrometer. Dried peptides of each fraction were resuspended in 5 µL 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in MS-grade H2O. 4 µL of each fraction was separated on the C18 column using a 90 min gradient starting from 5% to 95% (v/v) buffer B.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0). A false-discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for peptides and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acid residues were required. For Andromeda search, trypsin allowing for cleavage Nterminal of proline was chosen as enzyme specificity. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and protein Nterminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Initial mass deviation of precursor ion was limited to 7 ppm and mass deviation for fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Protein identification required at least one unique in each protein group. “Match between run” was used to transfer identities between adjacent SEC fractions. For data analysis, an Excel spreadsheet and the Solver were used for non-linear least-squares fitting. Mass spectrometry data matrices was processed with the MaxQuant companion software Perseus.51 Comparison against other proteome profiling studies was done using the Gene Ontology cell compartment keyword “membrane”.

### Publication Abstract
Membrane proteins can be examined in near-native lipid-bilayer environments with the advent of polymer-encapsulated nanodiscs. These nanodiscs self-assemble directly from cellular membranes, allowing in vitro probing of membrane proteins with techniques that have previously been restricted to soluble or detergent-solubilized proteins. Often, however, the high charge densities of existing polymers obstruct bioanalytical and preparative techniques. Thus, the authors&#xa0;aim to fabricate electroneutral-yet water-soluble-polymer nanodiscs. By attaching a sulfobetaine group to the commercial polymers DIBMA and SMA(2:1), these polyanionic polymers are converted to the electroneutral maleimide derivatives, Sulfo-DIBMA and Sulfo-SMA(2:1). Sulfo-DIBMA and Sulfo-SMA(2:1) readily extract proteins and phospholipids from artificial and cellular membranes to form nanodiscs. Crucially, the electroneutral nanodiscs avert unspecific interactions, thereby enabling new insights into protein-lipid interactions through lab-on-a-chip detection and in vitro translation of membrane proteins. Finally, the authors create a library comprising thousands of human membrane proteins and use proteome profiling by mass spectrometry to show that protein complexes are preserved in electroneutral nanodiscs.

### Keywords
Dibma nanodiscs, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Technical University Kaiserslautern
Molecular Genetics, Technical University Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Räschle
Molecular Genetics, Technical University Kaiserslautern


