### Accession
PXD047331

### Title
C19ORF84 connects piRNA and DNA methylation machineries to defend the mammalian germline

### Description
In the male mouse germline, PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), bound by the PIWI protein MIWI2 (PIWIL4), guide DNA methylation of young active transposons through SPOCD1. However, the underlying mechanisms of SPOCD1-mediated piRNA-directed transposon methylation and whether this pathway functions to protect the human germline remains unknown. We identified loss-of-function variants in human SPOCD1 that cause defective transposon silencing and male infertility. Through the analysis of one of these pathogenic alleles, we discovered that the uncharacterised protein C19ORF84 interacts with SPOCD1. DNMT3C, the DNA methyltransferase responsible for transposon methylation, associates with SPOCD1 and C19ORF84 in foetal gonocytes. Furthermore, C19ORF84 is essential for piRNA-directed DNA methylation and male mouse fertility. Finally, C19ORF84 mediates the in vivo association of SPOCD1 with the de novo methylation machinery. In summary, we have discovered a conserved role for the human piRNA pathway in transposon silencing and C19ORF84, an uncharacterised protein essential for orchestrating piRNA-directed DNA methylation.

### Sample Protocol
Following digestion, samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al (2007). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 1 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). The peptide sample was then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting it to 5 μL by 0.1% TFA. LC-MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) both coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm (2 µm particle size) EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific, UK), which was assembled on an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific, UK) and operated constantly at 50oC. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 150 min and then to 95% in 11 min. Mobile phase B was retained at 95% for 5 min and returned back to 2% a minute after until the end of the run (190 min).  Survey scans were recorded at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350-1500 m/z) with an ion target of 4.0e5, and injection time of 50ms. MS2 was performed in the ion trap at a rapid scan mode, with ion target of 2.0E4 and HCD fragmentation (Olsen et al, 2007) with normalized collision energy of 27. The isolation window in the quadrupole was 1.4 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.6.1.0 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against the complete/reference proteome set of Mus musculus (Uniprot, released in July 2017), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). For the first search, peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while for the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification.  Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modifications. Label-free quantitation analysis was performed by employing the MaxLFQ algorithm as described by Cox et al (2014).Absolute protein quantification was performed as described in Schwanhäusser et al, 2011. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
In the male mouse germ line, PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), bound by the PIWI protein MIWI2 (PIWIL4), guide DNA methylation of young active transposons through SPOCD1. However, the underlying mechanisms of SPOCD1-mediated piRNA-directed transposon methylation and whether this pathway functions to protect the human germ line remain unknown. We identified loss-of-function variants in human SPOCD1 that cause defective transposon silencing and male infertility. Through the analysis of these pathogenic alleles, we discovered that the uncharacterized protein C19ORF84 interacts with SPOCD1. DNMT3C, the DNA methyltransferase responsible for transposon methylation, associates with SPOCD1 and C19ORF84 in fetal gonocytes. Furthermore, C19ORF84 is essential for piRNA-directed DNA methylation and male mouse fertility. Finally, C19ORF84 mediates the in&#xa0;vivo association of SPOCD1 with the de novo methylation machinery. In summary, we have discovered a conserved role for the human piRNA pathway in transposon silencing and C19ORF84, an uncharacterized protein essential for orchestrating piRNA-directed DNA methylation.

### Keywords
C19orf84, Dna methylation, Pirna, Spocd1

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Institute for Stem Cell Research;
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology;
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Ansgar Zoch

### Lab Head
Dr Donal O'Carroll
University of Edinburgh


