### Accession
PXD027611

### Title
Identifying and characterising Thrap3, Bclaf1 and Erh direct interactions using cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Description
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is a powerful technology capable of yielding structural insights across the complex cellular protein interaction network. We performed XL-MS using MS-cleavable cross-linker disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO) on endogenous affinity-purified BAF complex. We identified numerous crosslinks between three BAF co-purifying proteins, namely Thrap3, Bclaf1 and Erh. Our data suggests that Bclaf1, Erh and Thrap3 interact closely and might represent a stable complex. The XL data allowed us to map interaction surfaces on Thrap3 and B, which overlap with the non-disordered portions of both proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Nuclear extracts were incubated with anti-ARID1A antibody (sc-32761, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) coupled to Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen). Crosslinking was performed on the IP sample while still coupled to the beads with 1mM or 5mM DSSO for 1 hour at RT. The reaction was quenched with 125mM Tris-HCl. The beads were washed and digested as previously described in Hillier et al. (2019) with a modified digestion schedule: Lys C digestion overnight, followed by Trypsin for ~4h X2 times and Trypsin again overnight.   Mass spectrometry analysis: Peptides generated by trypsin digestion were fractionated with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit according to manufacturer instructions, 8 fractions were collected and dried. LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each peptide fraction was reconstituted in 15 μL 0.1% formic acid and loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm trapping column at 10 μL/min flow rate of 0.1% formic acid loading buffer. The sample was then subjected to a gradient elution on the EASY-Spray C18 capillary column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm) at 50 °C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient separation method at flow rate 300 nL/min was as follows: for 90 min gradient from 5%-38% B, for 10 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 5% B. Precursors between 375-1,600 m/z and charge equal or higher than +3 were selected with mass resolution of 120,000 in the top speed mode in 5 sec and were isolated for CID fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 1.6 Th. Collision energy was set at 25%. Fragments with targeted mass difference of 31.9721 (DSSO crosslinker) were further subjected to CID fragmentation at the MS3 level with collision energy 35%, iontrap detection and MS2 isolation window 2 Th. Two precursor groups were selected with both ions in the pair. Targeted MS precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 30 seconds with 10 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data from mESCs IPs was analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific). For crosslinked samples, XLinkX nodes (FDR<1%) were used to search crosslinked peptides pairs (Liu et al., 2015) while Sequest was used for general MS2 search with DSSO modifications followed by Target Decoy PSM Validator. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20ppm. Fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The searches were performed against full UniProt Mouse database (Aughust 2019) together with cRAP contaminant database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Clms cross-linking mass spectrometry, Thrap3, Bclaf1, Xl-ms, Erh, Dsso, Endogenous complexes

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


