### Accession
PXD001375

### Title
Proteomic analysis of gliosomes from mouse brain for investigation of glial membrane proteins

### Description
Astrocytes are increasingly recognized as crucial contributors to neuronal function at synapses, axons, and somas. Reliable methods that can provide insight into the astrocyte proteins at the neuron-astrocyte functional interface are highly desirable. Here we conducted a mass spectrometry analysis of Percoll® gradient isolated gliosomes, a viable preparation of glial subcellular particles often used to study mechanisms of astrocytic transmitter uptake and release and their regulation. Gliosomes were compared with synaptosomes, a preparation containing the neurotransmitter release machinery, and accordingly synaptosomes were enriched for proteins involved in synaptic vesicle mediated transport. Interestingly, gliosome preparations were found to be enriched for different classes of known astrocyte proteins, such as VAMP3 (involved in astrocyte exocytosis), Ezrin (perisynaptic astrocyte cytoskeletal protein), and Basigin (astrocyte membrane glycoprotein), as well as for G-protein mediated signaling proteins. Together, these data provide the first detailed description of the gliosome proteome and show that gliosomes can be a useful preparation to study glial membrane proteins and associated processes.

### Sample Protocol
All experiments were conducted with approval of the Italian Ministry of Health Ethical Committee. Adult (2-4 months) C57BL6/J mice from Charles River (Italy, bred in-house) were used for the generation of Percoll®-isolated synaptosomes and gliosomes. Animals were euthanized and the hippocampus was rapidly dissected on ice. Puriﬁed gliosomes and synaptosomes were obtained essentially as previously described (Stigliani et al., 2006, J Neurochem), with minor modifications. In detail, the hippocampi from two mice were pooled and homogenized in 2 ml of 0.32 M sucrose, buffered at pH 7.4 with Tris (0.1 M)-HCl using 12 strokes at 900 rpm with a glass-teflon tissue grinder (clearance 0.25 mm - Potter-Elvehjem VWR International). The homogenate was centrifuged (5 min, 1,000 x g at 4°C) to remove nuclei and debris. The supernatant (S1) was collected and centrifuged (5 min, 12,000 x g at 4°C) to avoid contamination by small inert vesicles. The pellet (P2) was resuspended in 1ml of 0.32 M Tris-buffered sucrose, gently stratified on a discontinuous Percoll® gradient (3 mL of 2, 6, 10, and 20% v/v Percoll® in 0.32 M Tris-buffered sucrose) and centrifuged at 33,500 x g for 6 min. No more than 2 mL of suspension, corresponding to a maximum of 0.3 g tissue, was layered into each gradient tube.  The layers between 2% and 6% Percoll® (gliosomal fraction) and between 10 and 20% Percoll® (synaptosomal fraction) were collected. The samples were washed twice in 30-40 mL of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 7 min. The gliosomal and synaptosomal precipitates were then resuspended in 25 mM HEPES for further analysis. Gliosomal and synaptosomal fraction from 2 isolations were pooled together to generate samples with protein yield representing 4 animals In this method, gliosomes are considerably less abundant than synaptosomes, yielding approximately 10-fold less protein (for hippocampi from 4 mice, ~60 ug of gliosomes and ~600 ug of synaptosomes). In-gel digestion was performed as previously described (Li et al., 2012, Proteomics) with some modification. Eight gliosome, eight synaptosome, and five homogenate samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry. For all groups, 5 µg of each sample was diluted in SDS sample buffer and denatured for 5 minutes at 98 °C. To block cysteine residues, 2 uL of 30% acrylamide was added to each sample and allowed to incubate for 30 minutes. Samples were run on 10% SDS-PAGE gels just until all proteins had passed through the stacking gel. Gels were fixed overnight and stained with Coomassie blue to visualize all proteins. Each sample lane was cut into 2 pieces through the 50 kD marker to reduce overall sample complexity. Each gel piece was further cut into ~1 mm3 blocks and placed in a 96 well filter plate (Millipore). A collection plate (Eppendorf) was placed below the filter plate so that after spinning plates for 1 minute at 200g waste solutions could easily be discarded. A fresh collection plate was used for the peptide elution phase. Destaining of the gel slices was achieved by two rounds of incubation in 50% acetonitrile/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, dehydration by 100% acetonitrile, and rehydration in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After the second acetonitrile dehydration gel pieces were rehydrated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 300 ng trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, Mass Spec grade) and incubated at 37 °C for 18 hours. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with 2, 20 minute rounds of incubation in 50% acetonitrile/ 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid and a final round in 80% acetonitrile/ 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid. The extracted peptide solution was dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20 °C until mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were analyzed by nano LC-MSMS using an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex) coupled to the TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB-Sciex). Peptides were trapped on a 5 mm Pepmap 100 C18 column (300 µm ID, 5 µm particle size, from Dionex) and fractionated on a 200 mm Alltima C18 column (100 µm ID, 3 µm particle size). The acetonitrile concentration in the mobile phase was increased from 5 to 30 % in 90 min, to 40% in 5 min and to 90% in another 5 min, at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The eluted peptides were electrosprayed into the TripleTOF MS (5600 from AB-sciex).  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with single MS full scan (m/z 350-1200) followed by top 20 MS/MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Spectrum annotation and relative protein quantification were performed with Peaks 7 software (Ma et al., 2003, Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom). Searches were performed against the Swissprot database of canonical sequences (version 03-2014) for trypsin-digested peptides with a parent mass error tolerance of 25 ppm and a fragment mass error tolerance of 0.025 Da. We allowed for 2 missed cleavages, fixed proprionamide modification and variable modifications of N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionines, and deamination. Only spectra matched to a peptide with an FDR of less than 1% were used for protein quantification. To correct for variations in input material, intensities were normalized on total ion current.

### Publication Abstract
Astrocytes are being increasingly recognized as crucial contributors to neuronal function at synapses, axons, and somas. Reliable methods that can provide insight into astrocyte proteins at the neuron-astrocyte functional interface are highly desirable. Here, we conducted a mass spectrometry analysis of Percoll gradient-isolated gliosomes, a viable preparation of glial subcellular particles often used to study mechanisms of astrocytic transmitter uptake and release and their regulation. Gliosomes were compared with synaptosomes, a preparation containing the neurotransmitter release machinery, and, accordingly, synaptosomes were enriched for proteins involved in synaptic vesicle-mediated transport. Interestingly, gliosome preparations were found to be enriched for different classes of known astrocyte proteins, such as VAMP3 (involved in astrocyte exocytosis), Ezrin (perisynaptic astrocyte cytoskeletal protein), and Basigin (astrocyte membrane glycoprotein), as well as for G-protein-mediated signaling proteins. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD001375. Together, these data provide the first detailed description of the gliosome proteome and show that gliosomes can be a useful preparation to study glial membrane proteins and associated processes.

### Keywords
Synaptosome, Tripletof, Astrocyte proteins, Gliosome, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Dept. Molecular & Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology

### Submitter
Pim van Nierop

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Mark H.G. Verheijen
Dept. Molecular & Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


