### Accession
PXD039320

### Title
Shotgun Proteomics Analysis, Functional Networks and Peptide Biomarkers for Biogenic Amine-producing Bacteria

### Description
Biogenic amine-producing bacteria are responsible for the production of basic nitrogenous compounds, such as histamine, cadaverine, tyramine and putrescine, after foods spoil due to microorganisms. In the present work, we applied a shotgun proteomics approach to quickly and easily characterize 15 different foodborne strains of biogenic amine-producing bacteria. A total of 10673 peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) belonging to 4081 nonredundant peptides and corresponding to 1811 annotated proteins were identified. With the results, relevant functional pathways were determined and the strains were differentiated into different Euclidean hierarchical clusters. Moreover, a predicted protein‒protein interaction network of biogenic amine foodborne strains was created. The whole confidence network contains 260 nodes and 1973 interactions. Most of the identified proteins were related to pathways and networks of energy, putrescine metabolism and host‒virus interaction. In addition, a total of 556 nonredundant peptides were identified as virulence factors, and most of these peptides corresponded to functions such as toxins, antimicrobial compound production, antimicrobial resistance, additional resistances and tolerances, host colonization and immune evasion, ABC transporters, phage proteins, and alternative virulence factors and proteins involved in horizontal transfer. Potential species-specific peptide biomarkers were screened. Thus, 77 species-specific peptide biomarkers belonging to 64 different proteins were proposed to identify 10 species (Enterobacter aerogenes, Enterobacter cloacae, Hafnia alvei, Klebsiella oxytoca, Morganella morganii, Proteus mirabilis, Proteus penneri, Proteus vulgaris, Raoutella planticola, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia). All of these results constitute the first major dataset of peptides and proteins of seafood biogenic amine-producing strains. This repository may be useful for further studies, for the development of new therapeutic treatments for food intoxication and for tracking microbial sources in foodstuffs.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains: A total of 15 different seafood biogenic amine-producing bacteria were included in this study. Protein extracts were solubilized and further digested with trypsin. Shotgun LC‒ESI‒MS/MS analysis in an LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using SEQUEST-HT (Proteome Discoverer 2.4 package.

### Publication Abstract
Biogenic amine-producing bacteria are responsible for the production of basic nitrogenous compounds (histamine, cadaverine, tyramine, and putrescine) following the spoilage of food due to microorganisms. In this study, we adopted a shotgun proteomics strategy to characterize 15 foodborne strains of biogenic-amine-producing bacteria. A total of 10,673 peptide spectrum matches belonging to 4081 peptides and corresponding to 1811 proteins were identified. Relevant functional pathways were determined, and strains were differentiated into hierarchical clusters. An expected protein-protein interaction network was created (260 nodes/1973 interactions). Most of the determined proteins were associated with networks/pathways of energy, putrescine metabolism, and host-virus interaction. Additionally, 556 peptides were identified as virulence factors. Moreover, 77 species-specific peptide biomarkers corresponding to 64 different proteins were proposed to identify 10 bacterial species. This represents a major proteomic dataset of biogenic-amine-producing strains. These results may also be suitable for new treatments for food intoxication and for tracking microbial sources in foodstuffs.

### Keywords
Seafood, Shotgun proteomics, Lc‒esi‒ms/ms, Biogenic amine-producing bacteria, Mass spectrometry, Food, Bacterial detection and identification

### Affiliations
Department of Food Technology, Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Marine Research Institute (IIM), 36208 Vigo, Spain
CSIC

### Submitter
Mónica Carrera

### Lab Head
Dr Mónica Carrera
Department of Food Technology, Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Marine Research Institute (IIM), 36208 Vigo, Spain


