### Accession
PXD044597

### Title
Spo13/MEIKIN ensures a two-division meiosis by preventing the activation of APC/CAma1 at meiosis I

### Description
Genome haploidization at meiosis depends on two consecutive nuclear divisions, which are controlled by an oscillatory system consisting of Cdk1-cyclin B and the APC/C bound to the Cdc20 activator. How the oscillator generates exactly two divisions has been unclear. We have studied this question in yeast where exit from meiosis involves accumulation of the APC/C activator Ama1 at meiosis II. We show that inactivation of the meiosis I-specific protein Spo13/MEIKIN results in a single-division meiosis due to premature activation of APC/CAma1. In the wild-type, Spo13 bound to the polo-like kinase Cdc5 prevents Ama1 synthesis at meiosis I by stabilizing the translational repressor Rim4. In addition, Cdc5-Spo13 inhibits the activity of Ama1 by converting the B-type cyclin Clb1 from a substrate to an inhibitor of Ama1. Cdc20-dependent degradation of Spo13 at anaphase I unleashes a feedback loop that increases Ama1’s synthesis and activity, leading to irreversible exit from meiosis at the second division. Thus, by repressing the exit machinery at meiosis I, Cdc5-Spo13 ensures that cells undergo two divisions to produce haploid gametes.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin and Lys-C digests were analysed in separate LC-MS/MS runs. A 30 cm  75 m-column packed in-house with 1.9 m-silica beads (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ; Dr Maisch GmbH) was operated at 60 C by an Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded at 250 nl/min in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) plus 2% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and eluted by a gradient to 30% B (120 min), 60% B (10 min), 95% B (5 min), and 95% B (5 min). Eluting peptides were transferred via the nano-electrospray interface into a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Precursor ions were selected for high-energy collisional dissociation by a data-dependent top-12 method.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files of trypsin and Lys-C digests were merged in a single MaxQuant search against the S. cerevisiae UniProt database (UP000002311) combined with the relevant GFP-tagged bait protein and 247 common contaminants. Briefly, minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids and maximum mass to 4,600 Da. Strict trypsin or Lys-C specificity was required, allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation, oxidation of Met, deamination of Asn or Gln, and phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, or Tyr as variable modifications. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to five. Relative, label-free quantifications (LFQ) were obtained from the MaxLFQ algorithm using default parameters and further analysed in Perseus. Contaminants and matches to the reversed-sequence decoy database were removed, and LFQ intensities were log2-transformed. For interaction proteomics, proteins showing at least two valid values in at least one group were retained. Missing values were imputed with values from a normal distribution at the detection limit of the mass spectrometer (width, 0.3 SD; down-shift, 1.8 SD). For Clb1 phosphorylation analysis, phospho-sites with a localization probability of less than 0.75 were removed. Phospho-sites with at least two valid values in the control were retained, and phosphorylation site intensities were log2-transformed. Missing values were imputed as above.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Apc/c-ama1 / cyclin phosphorylation / meiotic exit / polo-like kinase / spo13/meikin / translational repressor

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry
Laboratory of Chromosome Biology Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Barbara Steigenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Wolfgang Zachariae
Laboratory of Chromosome Biology Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried, Germany


