### Accession
PXD038236

### Title
LRP1 in Vascular Remodeling and Angiotensin Signaling

### Description
Vascular smooth muscle cells (vSMC) exert a critical role in sensing and maintaining vascular integrity. These cells abundantly express the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1), a large endocytic and signaling receptor that recognizes numerous ligands including ApoE-rich lipoproteins, proteases, and protease-inhibitor complexes. We observed the spontaneous formation of aneurysms in the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) of both male and female mice in which LRP1 was genetically deleted in v SMC (smLRP1-/- mice). Quantitative proteomics revealed elevated abundance of several proteins in smLRP1-/- mice that are known to be induced by angiotensin II (AngII)-mediated signaling, suggesting that this pathway is dysregulated. Administration of losartan, an AngII type I receptor antagonist, or an angiotensinogen antisense oligonucleotide to reduce plasma angiotensinogen concentrations restored the normal SMA phenotype in smLRP1-/- mice and prevented aneurysm formation. Additionally, employing a vascular injury model, we noted excessive vascular remodeling and neointima formation in smLRP1-/- mice that was restored by losartan administration. Together, these findings reveal that LRP1 regulates vascular integrity and remodeling of the SMA by attenuating excessive AngII-mediated signaling.  

### Sample Protocol
Global Quantification of Protein Expression   Superior mesenteric artery tissue from 14-week-old WT and smLRP1-/- mice were rinsed in PBS to remove blood, frozen with liquid nitrogen in a tissueTUBE TT05M (Covaris Cat# 520071) and impact pulverized with a cryoPREP CP01 (Covaris Cat# 500230). Fractured tissue was transferred to a 1 ml milliTUBE containing an AFA fiber (Covaris Cat# 520135) in 200 ml of 50mM HEPES pH 8.5, 150mM NaCl, 2% Triton X114 and sonicated with an M220 Focused-Ultrasonicator (Covaris Cat# 500295).  Sonication parameters were:  temperature 15°C, peak power 75W, duty factor 26, cycles/burst = 1000, duration 600sec.  Extracted proteins were clarified of insoluble material by centrifugation at 15,000 x g for 20 min at 4°C.  Protein concentrations were determined with the Micro BCA colorimetric assay (Pierce) with the addition of SDS to a final concentration of 1% in the assay solvent to prevent detergent clouding.        Aliquots containing approximately 5 mg of protein were processed using the SP3 protocol as described (87) with some modifications. Briefly, the sample aliquots were brought to 50 ml volume and disulfide bonds were reduced and alkylated simultaneously with 10 mM TCEP, 40mM 2-chloroacetamide in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 1% SDC at 70 oC for 10 min then cooled on ice.  Proteins were precipitated and captured following addition of 10 ml of a washed 10 mg/ml suspension of SpeedBeads (Cytiva) and 400 ml of ethanol.  After shaking for 10 min at RT the beads were magnetically captured and washed 3 times with 200 ml of 80% ethanol in water. Proteins were digested on the beads in 50 ml of 50mM HEPES pH 8.5, 1% SDC, 10 ng/ml Trypsin (Promega) overnight at room temperature with shaking sufficient to maintain the beads in suspension.  The digest was diluted 10-fold with 80% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid, separated from the beads magnetically and the resulting peptides captured on 2 mm discs of Empore Cation (CDS Analytical) fitted into 1000 ml pipette tips (Sartorious Cat# 791000). Detergents and other contaminants were removed by washing the tips serially with 1) ethyl acetate; 2) 80% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid; and finally, 3) 10% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Peptides were eluted directly into injection vials with freshly prepared 80% acetonitrile, 5% ammonium hydroxide and immediately dried down in a centrifugal vacuum evaporator.        One fifth of the recovered peptides from each sample was subsequently analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. In-house capillary columns were constructed from 360 mm OD, 100 mm ID x 30 cm fused silica tubing (Molex) with laser pulled tips (Sutter Instruments) and were packed with Reprosil-PUR 3mm C18-Aq (Dr. Maisch GmBH). Solvent A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, respectively. A 180 min linear gradient from 2% to 35% solvent B was used for chromatographic separation. Peptides were analyzed with a Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Electron) mass spectrometer using nano-electrospray ionization with an applied voltage of 1800V. MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000, and the 15 most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD). MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000. Dynamic exclusion parameters were: list size 500, mass window of +/- 7ppm and a duration of 1min.  Automatic gain control settings were: MS1 target 1x106, maximum inject time 100ms; MS2 target 4x104, maximum inject time 100ms.  

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data analysis.   Spectrum matching, protein identification and validation were performed with MSFragger (88) and quantification of protein intensities with matching between runs was performed with IonQuant (89) as components of the FragPipe analysis pipeline using the default settings of each module. The protein database used for the search was the Mus musculus reviewed sequence database downloaded from UniProt on March 8, 2022. The results were subsequently processed to filter out common contaminants, decoy hits from the reverse database and protein groups identified by a single peptide. The data was filtered as follows: (1) binary expression of a protein (i.e. protein exclusively identified in either LRP1+/+ or smLRP1-/-) was only considered relevant if all LRP1+/+ and smLRP1-/- samples expressed the protein; (2) for samples expressed in both LRP1+/+ and smLRP1-/- tissue the filtering process required two or more proteins to be detected in both the LRP1+/+ and smLRP1-/- samples.  False discovery analysis was performed using the Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli method (90) using GraphPad vs9 software. Analysis of the proteomic results employing causal analysis (52) in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis® (IPA) software  upstream analysis software (QIAGEN Bioinformatics, Redwood City, California, USA). For IPA analysis, the binary values were imputed using local minimum intensities. Enrichment analyses for gene ontology (biological process) were performed using “clusterProfiler (4.2.2)” R package on R (4.1.0).       Statistical Analyses   Prism 9.0, GraphPad Software, (San Diego, CA) was used for statistical analysis. Normality was determined on data sets employing the Shapiro-Wilk test. To compare variables between two groups an unpaired 2-tailed Students t test was used for normally distributed variables. When the effect of two variables were analyzed in data sets containing normally distrusted variables, a two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc test was used. To compare more than 2 groups in which normality was not met, the variables were analyzed by a one-way ANOVA on ranks (Kruskal-Wallis non-parametric test with Dunn’s multiple comparison post-hoc test). All results are presented as mean ± SEM.  A p-value ≤ 0.05 was set as the threshold for significance.  

### Publication Abstract
Vascular smooth muscle cells (vSMCs) exert a critical role in sensing and maintaining vascular integrity. These cells abundantly express the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1), a large endocytic signaling receptor that recognizes numerous ligands, including apolipoprotein E-rich lipoproteins, proteases, and protease-inhibitor complexes. We observed the spontaneous formation of aneurysms in the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) of both male and female mice in which LRP1 was genetically deleted in vSMCs (smLRP1-/- mice). Quantitative proteomics revealed elevated abundance of several proteins in smLRP1-/- mice that are known to be induced by angiotensin II-mediated (AngII-mediated) signaling, suggesting that this pathway was dysregulated. Administration of losartan, an AngII type I receptor antagonist, or an angiotensinogen antisense oligonucleotide to reduce plasma angiotensinogen concentrations restored the normal SMA phenotype in smLRP1-/- mice and prevented aneurysm formation. Additionally, using a vascular injury model, we noted excessive vascular remodeling and neointima formation in smLRP1-/- mice that was restored by losartan administration. Together, these findings reveal that LRP1 regulates vascular integrity and remodeling of the SMA by attenuating excessive AngII-mediated signaling.

### Keywords
Lrp1, Sma remodeling, Animal models of human disease, Proteomics, Tgf-β, Ace/angiotensin receptors/renin angiotensin system, Hemodynamics, Smooth muscle proliferation and differentiation, Remodeling, Smooth muscle cells, Vascular biology, Ang ii

### Affiliations
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Center for Vascular and Inflammatory Diseases
University of Maryland School of Medicine

### Submitter
Brian Hampton

### Lab Head
Dr Dudley Strickland
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Center for Vascular and Inflammatory Diseases


