### Accession
PXD035159

### Title
Absolute protein quantification of Mycoplasma pneumoniae proteome by combining selected reaction monitoring of a reduced set of labeled peptides and label-free shotgun mass spectrometry.

### Description
We quantified the protein abundances of Mycoplasma pneumoniae (Mpn), a genome-reduced organism, by combining selected reaction monitoring of a reduced set of labeled peptides and label-free shotgun mass spectrometry. A set of 77 labeled peptides were synthesized and used as internal standard peptides to precisely and quantitatively measure the absolute concentrations of proteins in a tandem mass spectrometer [1]. The heavy peptides were chosen based on tryptic peptides of endogenous proteins previously observed in mass spectrometry experiments and that covered more than a 1000-fold range of protein concentrations. Three time points of Mpn growth curve (48, 72 and 96 hours) and the heavy peptides were injected per triplicates in order to calculate the endogenous amount of each peptide (single reference point quantitation) [2], resulting in the absolute quantification of 73 reference proteins. A calibration curve between the absolute amount of reference proteins and the proteome-wide protein intensities allowed the estimation of absolute protein abundances for all detected proteins [3]. In order to further improve the quantification, four additional label-free mass spectrometry datasets of Mpn [4] using different protein extraction methods, from a previous project, were combined with the original dataset, which allowed to quantify the abundances of 528 proteins (75% of the proteome of Mpn). 1.  Gerber SA, Rush J, Stemman O, Kirschner MW, Gygi SP. Absolute quantification of proteins and phosphoproteins from cell lysates by tandem MS. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;100: 6940–6945. doi:10.1073/pnas.0832254100 2.  Campbell J, Rezai T, Prakash A, Krastins B, Dayon L, Ward M, et al. Evaluation of absolute peptide quantitation strategies using selected reaction monitoring. Proteomics. 2011;11: 1148–1152. doi:10.1002/pmic.201000511 3.  Schmidt A, Kochanowski K, Vedelaar S, Ahrné E, Volkmer B, Callipo L, et al. The quantitative and condition-dependent Escherichia coli proteome. Nat Biotechnol. 2016;34: 104–110. doi:10.1038/nbt.3418 4.  Miravet-Verde S, Ferrar T, Espadas-García G, Mazzolini R, Gharrab A, Sabido E, et al. Unraveling the hidden universe of small proteins in bacterial genomes. Mol Syst Biol. 2019;15: e8290. doi:10.15252/msb.20188290 5.  Yus E, Maier T, Michalodimitrakis K, van Noort V, Yamada T, Chen W-H, et al. Impact of genome reduction on bacterial metabolism and its regulation. Science. 2009;326: 1263–1268. doi:10.1126/science.1177263 6.  Wiśniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods. 2009;6: 359–362. doi:10.1038/nmeth.1322 7.  Picotti P, Bodenmiller B, Mueller LN, Domon B, Aebersold R. Full dynamic range proteome analysis of S. cerevisiae by targeted proteomics. Cell. 2009;138: 795–806. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.051 8.  Martens L, Van Damme P, Van Damme J, Staes A, Timmerman E, Ghesquière B, et al. The human platelet proteome mapped by peptide-centric proteomics: a functional protein profile. Proteomics. 2005;5: 3193–3204. doi:10.1002/pmic.200401142 9.  Desiere F, Deutsch EW, King NL, Nesvizhskii AI, Mallick P, Eng J, et al. The peptideatlas project. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006;34: D655–D658. Available: https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-abstract/34/suppl_1/D655/1132687 10.  Lange V, Picotti P, Domon B, Aebersold R. Selected reaction monitoring for quantitative proteomics: a tutorial. Mol Syst Biol. 2008;4: 222. doi:10.1038/msb.2008.61 11.  MacLean B, Tomazela DM, Shulman N, Chambers M, Finney GL, Frewen B, et al. Skyline: an open source document editor for creating and analyzing targeted proteomics experiments. Bioinformatics. 2010;26: 966–968. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq054 12.  Perkins DN, Pappin DJ, Creasy DM, Cottrell JS. Probability-based protein identification by searching sequence databases using mass spectrometry data. Electrophoresis. 1999;20: 3551–3567. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1522-2683(19991201)20:18<3551::AID-ELPS3551>3.0.CO;2-2 13.  Elias JE, Gygi SP. Target-decoy search strategy for increased confidence in large-scale protein identifications by mass spectrometry. Nat Methods. 2007;4: 207–214. doi:10.1038/nmeth1019

### Sample Protocol
M. pneumoniae cell cultures were grown in Haylick rich medium as previously described [5] for 72h, split into biological triplicates and grown for 6h (exponential phase). 30 g of each sample was reduced with dithiothreitol (2.3M, 30min, 56°C), alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (5M mM, 30 min, 25 ºC) and digested with 3 g LysC (Wako, cat # 129-02541) overnight at 37ºC and then with 3 g of trypsin. 77 proteins were selected for quantification using selected reaction monitoring or SRM (Table S4). SRM assays for the selected proteins were developed following the general high‐throughput strategy previously reported [7]. The selected peptides were chemically synthesized using C-terminal 13C6, 15N2-Lysine or 13C6, 15N4-Arginine and used for SRM assay development. Fragment ion spectra were collected for each peptide using a shotgun data-dependent acquisition method in a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA) coupled to a nano-flow HPLC (EasyLC Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). SRM measurements were performed on a 5500 Q-Trap mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) coupled to a nanoLC Ultra-1DPlus (AB Sciex). Measurements were done in scheduled SRM mode, using a retention time window of 6 min. Around 250 transitions were packed per method with a maximum total cycle time of 1.5 seconds, to ensure dwell times over 10 ms per transition. For each peptide, at least 3 transitions were monitored (Table S5). SRM data was processed using the Skyline software v3.1.0.7382 [11] and data peaks were evaluated based on retention time, transition intensity rank as compared with MS2 spectral library, co-elution between the endogenous and the labeled reference peptide were also considered. To determine the linear range of the peptides, different amounts of each peptide were injected per triplicate and a linear regression was generated for each peptide. Three time points of the Mycoplasma pneumoniae growth curve (48, 72 and 96 hours) and two amounts (500ng and 2000ng) plus the heavy peptides (Table S4) were injected per triplicates in order to calculate the endogenous amount of each peptide (single reference point quantitation) [2] (Table S6). 2000ng of three time point of the M. pneumoniae growing curve (48, 72 and 96 hour) were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EasyLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto the 2-cm Nano Trap column with an inner diameter of 100 μm packed with C18 particles of 5 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 120 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60.000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Data from the SRM experiment were processed as follows. The obtained MS2 data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science [12] ). Search parameters were set to 7 ppm for the precursor mass tolerance, 0.5 Da for the fragment mass tolerance, and fully tryptic peptides and no missed cleavages were selected. An identification false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on decoy assignments was used [13]. Oxidation of methionine and protein acetylation at the N-terminal were defined as variable modification, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines, and 13C6,15N2-Lysine and 13C6,15N4-Arginine were set as fixed modifications. Data from the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro were processed as follows. Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science ) [12] were used for peptide identification. Samples were searched against a M. pneumoniae database with a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries (87059 entries). Trypsin was chosen as an enzyme and a maximum of three miscleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M) and acetylation (N-terminal) were used as variable modifications. Searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 7 ppm, a product ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Resulting data files were filtered for FDR < 5 %. Protein top 3 areas have been calculated with unique peptides per protein ungrouped.

### Publication Abstract
Translation efficiency has been mainly studied by ribosome profiling, which only provides an incomplete picture of translation kinetics. Here, we integrated the absolute quantifications of tRNAs, mRNAs, RNA half-lives, proteins, and protein half-lives with ribosome densities and derived the initiation and elongation rates for 475 genes (67% of all genes), 73 with high precision, in the bacterium Mycoplasma pneumoniae (Mpn). We found that, although the initiation rate varied over 160-fold among genes, most of the known factors had little impact on translation efficiency. Local codon elongation rates could not be fully explained by the adaptation to tRNA abundances, which varied over 100-fold among tRNA isoacceptors. We provide a comprehensive quantitative view of translation efficiency, which suggests the existence of unidentified mechanisms of translational regulation in Mpn.

### Keywords
Absolute quantification, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Label-free, Selected reaction monitoring

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), the Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Carrer Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain.

### Submitter
Marc Weber

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), the Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Carrer Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain.


