### Accession
PXD019720

### Title
Mytilus galloprovincialis gills exposed to TDCPP

### Description
Mussels (Mytilus galloprovincialis) were exposed during 7 and 28 days in seawater (control), seawater + acetone (solvent control, SC), and 10 micrograms per Litre of tris(1,3-dichloro-2-propyl) phosphate (TDCPP). TDCPP was added from a stock solution prepared in acetone, the volume added being 100 µL per 30 L aquaria. The same volume of acetone was added to SC aquaria. Mussel density was 20 mussels per each 30 L aquaria at the beginning of the experiment and varied between 15 ‒ 20 mussels/30 L aquaria during the 28 days exposure period. Exposure conditions were the following: T = 15.6 ± 0.7 ºC, S = 35.5 ± 0.5 ppt, pH = 7.9 ± 0.1, O2 = 7.9 ± 0.6 mg L-1 and 10:14h light:dark photoperiod. Water was renewed twice per week and mussels were fed before every water renewal with a mixture of phytoplankton representing 1% of mussel tissue dry weight.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of gill proteins was performed by sonication in lysis buffer composed of 7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea and 4% CHAPS. Then samples were centrifuged (20,000 g, 30 min, 4 °C) and the supernatants collected in 50 µL aliquots and frozen at -80 ºC until further processing. Total protein concentration was quantified using the Bradford method adapted to microplate, using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard and using a similar matrix (10% lysis buffer) in both BSA standards and samples. After this, 3 pools of 4 gills ‒corresponding to two females and two males in similar stage of gametogenesis‒ were made per treatment, except for the control treatment at 28 days of exposure (T28-Control) where only two pools were prepared due to insufficient number of mussels. For sample pooling, the same amount of protein was added from each one of the four protein extracts and each pool was diluted to a concentration of 0.5 µg µL-1 with ultrapure water (Milli-Q). Protein precipitation was done by adding six volumes of pre-chilled (-20 °C) acetone to 100 µL of protein sample and incubating 2 h at -20 °C. After this, samples were centrifuged (8000 g, 10 min, 4 °C), acetone was decanted and the pellet was allowed to dry for 5 min. Then, protein was resuspended in 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate). Proteins were reduced by adding 5 µL of TCEP (Bond-Breaker TCEP Solution, Neutral pH) during 1 hour at 55 °C and alkylated by adding 5 µL of 375 mM iodoacetamide during 30 minutes protected from light at room temperature. Protein digestion was made in-solution by adding 10 µL of sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) (0.1 µg µL-1 in 100 mM TEAB) and incubated at 37 °C overnight.  Peptide labeling was performed with TMTsixplexTM Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three proteomic experiments were made, each one consisted in the analysis of a mixture of six samples (corresponding to the six treatments) labeled with each one of the six TMTsixplex tags. In order to increase analysis resolution, peptide fractionation was done with Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer instructions, i.e. using a series of solutions mixing acetonitrile with 0.1% trietilamine, resulting in increasing acetonitrile concentrations from 12.5% to 50%, obtaining eight fractions for each experiment. Samples were analyzed by via LC–MS/MS using a Proxeon EASY-nLC II liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a customized database obtained from the six-frame translation of 151,320 sequences from M. galloprovincialis transcriptomes (RNA-seq data) obtained from different tissues including the gill (Moreira et al., 2015) using the software PEAKS Studio v8.0 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). Common contaminants were included in this database. A decoy sequence database was also included in the analysis to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor and the fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. The fixed modifications were carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues and TMT 6plex, while oxidation on methionine and N-terminal acetylation were introduced as variable modifications. Protein identifications were only accepted when the number of matched peptide sequences > 2, unique peptides > 1, peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) FDR < 0.1%, and protein identification PEAKS score > 20 (0.8% FDR). For quantification, only unique peptides were considered, and spectrum quality score was set to 12 following the advice of PEAKS 8.0 manual.

### Publication Abstract
Organophosphate flame retardants (OPFRs) are (re-)emergent environmental pollutants increasingly being used because of the restriction of other flame retardants. The chlorinated OPFR, tris(1,3-dichloro-2-propyl) phosphate (TDCPP) is among those of highest environmental concern, but its potential effects in the marine environment have rarely been investigated. We exposed a widely used sentinel marine mussel species, Mytilus galloprovincialis, to 10 &#x3bc;g L<sup>-1</sup> of TDCPP during 28 days and studied: (i) the kinetics of bioaccumulation and elimination of the compound, (ii) the effect on two molecular biomarkers, glutathione S-transferase (GST) and acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activities, and (iii) proteomic alterations in the gills, following an isobaric labeling quantitative shotgun proteomic approach, at two exposure times (7 and 28 days). Uptake and elimination of TDCPP by mussels were very fast, and the bioconcentration factor of this compound in mussels was 147 L kg<sub>ww</sub><sup>-1</sup>, confirming that this compound is not very bioaccumulative, as predicted by its chemical properties. GST activity was not affected by TDCPP exposure, but AChE activity was inhibited by TDCPP at both 7 and 28 days of exposure. Proteomic analysis revealed subtle effects of TDCPP in mussel gills, since few proteins (less than 2 % of the analysed proteome) were significantly affected by TDCPP, and effect sizes were low. The most relevant effects detected were the up-regulation of epimerase family protein SDR39U1, an enzyme that could be involved in detoxification processes, at both exposure times, and the down-regulation of receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase N2-like (PTPRN2) after 7 days of exposure, which is involved in neurotransmitter secretion and might be related to the neurotoxicity described for this compound. Exposure time rather than TDCPP exposure was the most important driver of protein abundance changes, with 33 % of the proteome being affected by this factor, suggesting that stress caused by laboratory conditions could be an important confounding factor that needs to be controlled in similar ecotoxicology studies. Proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD019720.

### Keywords
Gills, Mytilus galloprovincialis, Tmt-6plex

### Affiliations
Instituto Español de Oceanografía
Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology, University of Vigo, Spain

### Submitter
Paula Sanchez-Marin

### Lab Head
Dr Angel P. Diz
Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology, University of Vigo, Spain


