### Accession
PXD009796

### Title
Peptidomics profiling of murine intestine

### Description
The aim of the project is to generate a peptidomics map of gut hormone peptides along the gastrointestinal tract, starting with the stomach and including the duodenum, jejunum, ileum, colon and rectum. The tissues would be collected after surgery and the peptide fraction extracted and anlysed by nano LC-MS to identify what peptide hormones are present. These data will then be used to compare against the murine transcriptome, and also for comparison against equivent peptides from human intestinal extracts.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues (in the region of 40mg) were taken from mice, placed into 6M GuHCl and homogenised using ceramic bead based homogenisers. The supernatant was transfered to tubes and precipitated using 80% ACN in water. The aqueous layer was removed, dried under oxygen free nitrogen, and reconstituted for solid phase extraction. The peptides were then reduced and alkylated to break any disulphide bonds prior to nano LC-MS/MS analysis and database searching using the PEAKS 8.5 software package.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS software 8.5 was used, with a "no enzyme" setting, with fixed carbamidomethylation on cysteine. Variable modifications included: C-terminal amide, N-terminal pyroglutamate and N-terminal acetylation

### Publication Abstract
Bariatric surgery is widely used to treat obesity and improves type 2 diabetes beyond expectations from the degree of weight loss. Elevated post-prandial concentrations of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), peptide YY (PYY), and insulin are widely reported, but the importance of GLP-1 in post-bariatric physiology remains debated. Here, we show that GLP-1 is a major driver of insulin secretion after bariatric surgery, as demonstrated by blocking GLP-1 receptors (GLP1Rs) post-gastrectomy in lean humans using Exendin-9 or in mice using an anti-GLP1R antibody. Transcriptomics and peptidomics analyses revealed that human and mouse enteroendocrine cells were unaltered post-surgery; instead, we found that elevated plasma GLP-1 and PYY correlated with increased nutrient delivery to the distal gut in mice. We conclude that increased GLP-1 secretion after bariatric surgery arises from rapid nutrient delivery to the distal gut and is a key driver of enhanced insulin secretion.

### Keywords
Gut hormones, Mouse, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
Metabolic Research Laboratories, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Richard Kay

### Lab Head
Dr Fiona M Gribble
Metabolic Research Laboratories, University of Cambridge


