### Accession
PXD018914

### Title
Targeted deglycosylation with a nanobody-directed split OGA in living cells

### Description
O-GlcNAc is an essential and dynamic post-translational modification present on thousands of nucleocytoplasmic proteins. Interrogating the role of O-GlcNAc on a target protein in cells is critical yet challenging without disturbing O-GlcNAc globally or after extensive glycosite mapping. Herein, we developed a nanobody-fused split O-GlcNAcase (OGA) as a targeted O-GlcNAc eraser for protein-selective O-GlcNAc removal in cells. Through systematic screening, we identified the essential domains of OGA and afforded a split OGA with limited activity, which selectively reinstated deglycosylation activity on the target protein upon fusion of a nanobody in living cells. We demonstrate the generality of the O-GlcNAc eraser against a series of target proteins and reveal that O-GlcNAc stabilizes the transcription factor c-Jun and promotes its interaction with c-Fos. Thus, nanobody-directed split OGA speeds the selective removal and functional evaluation of O-GlcNAc on individual proteins via an approach that is generalizable to a broader array of post-translational modifications.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, the proteins in PBS containing 1% SDS were diluted with PBS and incubated with 100 µM THPTA, 0.5 mM CuSO4, 200 µM Biotin-Alkyne probe and 2.5 mM fresh sodium ascorbate for click chemistry at 37 ˚C for 4 h, followed by protein precipitation and resuspension into 400 µL PBS containing 2% SDS. The protein solutions were diluted with PBS to lower the final concentration of SDS into 0.2% and incubated with pre-washed 400 µL streptavidin beads slurry. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 4 h with gentle rotation. The beads were transferred into the Bio-Spin column and washed with 1 mL 8M urea, 5 mL 0.2%SDS/PBS, 5 mL PBS and 5 mL Milli-Q water sequentially with the help of a vacuum manifold. After changing buffer with 500 µL 500 mM urea, 1mM CaCl2 in PBS, 2 µg trypsin was added, and the resulting mixture was incubated at 37˚C for 16 h. The eluant containing trypsin digested peptides were collected as the trypsin fraction for protein identifications. The peptides were desalted by C18 Tips following the manufacturer’s instructions and resuspended in 20 µL 50 mM TEAB buffer. For each sample, 5 µL the corresponding amine-based TMT 10-plex reagents (10 µg/µL) was added and reacted for 1 h at room temperature. The reactions were quenched with 2 µL 5% hydroxylamine solution and combined. The combined mixture was concentrated using Eppendorf Vacufuge to dryness and stored at -20 ˚C until analysis.  A Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 system was coupled to a ThermoScientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid with a nano-electrospray ion source. Mobile phases A and B were water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (v/v), respectively. For trypsin digested peptides, peptides were separated with a linear gradient from 4 to 32% B within 140 min, followed by an increase to 50% B within 10 min and further to 98% B within 10 min, and re-equilibration. The instrument parameters were set as follows: survey scans of peptide precursors were performed at 120K FWHM resolution over a m/z range of 410-1800. HCD fragmentation was performed on the top 10 most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state from 2 to 5 at a resolving power setting of 50K and fragmentation energy of 37% in the Orbitrap. CID fragmentation was applied with 35% collision energy and resulting fragments detected using the normal scan rate in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the trypsin fraction, the data was searched against the UniProt/SwissProt human (Homo sapiens) protein database (Aug. 19, 2016, 20,156 total entries) and contaminant proteins using Sequest HT algorithm. The database was adjusted by deleting O60502 (OGA) and replacing P37198 (Nup62) with GFP-Nup62 protein sequence. Searches were performed with the following guidelines: spectra with a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 1.5; trypsin as enzyme, 2 missed cleavages; variable oxidation on methionine residues (15.995 Da); static carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.021 Da), static TMT labeling (229.163 Da) at lysine residues and peptide N-termini; 10 ppm mass error tolerance on precursor ions, and 0.02 Da mass error on fragment ions. Data were filtered with a peptide-to-spectrum match of 1% FDR using Percolator. The TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier without normalization. For the obtained proteome, the data was further filtered with the following guidelines: protein FDR confidence is high; unique peptides are greater than 2; master protein only; exclude all contaminant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is an essential and dynamic post-translational modification that is presented on thousands of nucleocytoplasmic proteins. Interrogating the role of O-GlcNAc on a single target protein is crucial, yet challenging to perform in cells. Herein, we developed a nanobody-fused split O-GlcNAcase (OGA) as an O-GlcNAc eraser for selective deglycosylation of a target protein in cells. After systematic cellular optimization, we identified a split OGA with reduced inherent deglycosidase activity that selectively removed O-GlcNAc from the desired target protein when directed by a nanobody. We demonstrate the generality of the nanobody-fused split OGA using four nanobodies against five target proteins and use the system to study the impact of O-GlcNAc on the transcription factors c-Jun and c-Fos. The nanobody-directed O-GlcNAc eraser provides a new strategy for the functional evaluation and engineering of O-GlcNAc via the selective removal of O-GlcNAc from individual proteins directly in cells.

### Keywords
O-glcnac; nanobody; oga; c-jun;

### Affiliations
DEPARTMENT of CHEMISTRY & CHEMICAL BIOLOGY, HARVARD UNIVERSITY
Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
DEPARTMENT of CHEMISTRY & CHEMICAL BIOLOGY, HARVARD UNIVERSITY


