### Accession
PXD010940

### Title
Integrative analysis of Paneth cell proteomic data from intestinal organoids reveals functional processes affected in Crohn’s disease due to autophagy impairment

### Description
Crohn’s disease (CD) is associated with multiple Paneth cell dysfunctions such as altered antimicrobial secretion that relies on autophagy - an essential process controlling the turnover of cellular components. Genome-wide association studies have linked CD to mutations in the ATG16l1 gene, encoding an important component of the autophagy machinery. Patients carrying the ATG16l1 CD risk allele have Paneth cell abnormalities, as reproduced in Atg16l1-deficient mouse models. However, the direct effect of the ATG16L1-deficiency and autophagy-impairment in Paneth cells has not been analysed in detail. To investigate this, we generated a mouse model lacking ATG16L1 specifically in intestinal epithelial cells (Atg16l1△IEC) making these cells impaired in autophagy. Using a 3D small intestinal organoid culture model, which we enriched for Paneth cells and compared the proteomic profiles of organoids derived from the wild-type (WT) and the Atg16l1△IEC mice. We used an integrated computational approach combining protein-protein interaction networks, list of proteins potentially targeted by autophagy and functional information on the proteins with altered protein levels to identify the  mechanistic link between autophagy-impairment and disrupted cellular process. 198 (70%) of the 284 altered proteins were more abundant in autophagy-impaired organoids than WT organoids that could be due to a reduced protein turnover. Combining the proteomic dataset with the potential target proteins of selective autophagy proteins revealed that 116 (41%) of the differentially abundant proteins could rely on autophagy-mediated turnover. Taken together, our results suggest that proteins with increased levels in autophagy-impaired background require an autophagy-mediated turnover mechanism, and that their altered levels in CD could affect key cellular processes. Consequently, we pointed out the importance of autophagy in controlling the  turnover of proteins relevant in key Paneth cell functions such as exocytosis, apoptosis and DNA damage repair. Our study unravels autophagy-dependent cellular processes of Paneth cells that not directly relies on the autophagy process, rather than a selective protein turnover mechanism. The identified proteins and processes open new avenues for targeted, cell type-specific therapeutic interventions in CD.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics On day 8 post crypt-isolation, Paneth enriched 3D organoids were extracted from Matrigel using Cell Recovery Solution (BD Bioscience), washed in PBS and centrifuged at 300xg for 5 minutes. Organoid pellets were lysed by sonication in 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were heated at 80°C for 15 min before centrifugation at 12,000xg to pellet debris. The supernatant was retained and proteins reduced with 3 mM DTT (Sigma) at 60°C for 10 min, cooled, then alkylated with 9 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) at RT for 30 min in the dark; all steps were performed with intermittent vortex-mixing. Proteomic-grade trypsin (Sigma) was added at a protein:trypsin ratio of 50:1 and incubated at 37°C overnight. SDC was removed by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). Peptide samples were centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 30 min to remove precipitated SDC.  NanoLC MS ESI MS/MS analysis Peptides were analysed by on-line nanoflow LC using the Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific) system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) essentially as described in  Dong et al 2017 (ref). Peptides were separated by an Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) fused to a silica nano-electrospray emitter (Dionex).  Column temperature was kept at a constant  35°C. Chromatography buffers consisted of 0.1 % formic acid (buffer A) and 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of 3.8 – 50 % buffer B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge states +2 to +5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 100 and 45ms, respectively, and the ion target value was set to 3E6 for survey scans and 1E5 for the MS/MS scans. MS/MS events were acquired at a resolution of 30,000. Repetitive sequencing of peptides was minimized through dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 20s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Spectral data was imported into Progenesis QI (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). Runs were time aligned using default settings and using an auto selected run as reference.  Peaks were picked by the software using default settings and filtered to include only peaks with a charge state between +2 and +7. Spectral data were converted into .mgf files with Progenesis QI and exported for peptide identification using the Mascot (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) search engine. Tandem MS data were searched against a database including translated ORFs from the Mus musculus genome (Uniprot reference proteome (reviewed), UP000000589, February 2017) and a contaminant database (cRAP, GPMDB, 2012) (combined 17,010 sequences; 9,549,678 residues. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set as 0.05 Da. Two missed tryptic cleavages were permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) set as a variable modification. Mascot search results were further validated using the machine learning algorithm Percolator embedded within Mascot. The Mascot decoy database function was utilised and the false discovery rate (FDR) was <1%, while individual percolator ion scores >13 indicated identity or extensive homology (p <0.05). Mascot search results were imported into Progenesis QI as XML files. Peptide intensities were normalised against the reference run by Progenesis QI and these intensities were used to highlight relative differences in protein expression between sample groups. Only proteins with 2 or more identified peptides were included in the dataset. Statistical analysis (one factor anova) of the data was performed using Progenesis QI to identify significantly (q ≤ 0.05 and p < 0.05, relative fold change ≥ 2) proteins with altered abundances.

### Publication Abstract
Paneth cells are key epithelial cells that provide an antimicrobial barrier and maintain integrity of the small-intestinal stem cell niche. Paneth cell abnormalities are unfortunately detrimental to gut health and are often associated with digestive pathologies such as Crohn's disease or infections. Similar alterations are observed in individuals with impaired autophagy, a process that recycles cellular components. The direct effect of autophagy impairment on Paneth cells has not been analysed. To investigate this, we generated a mouse model lacking <i>Atg16l1</i> specifically in intestinal epithelial cells, making these cells impaired in autophagy. Using three-dimensional intestinal organoids enriched for Paneth cells, we compared the proteomic profiles of wild-type and autophagy-impaired organoids. We used an integrated computational approach combining protein-protein interaction networks, autophagy-targeted proteins and functional information to identify the mechanistic link between autophagy impairment and disrupted pathways. Of the 284 altered proteins, 198 (70%) were more abundant in autophagy-impaired organoids, suggesting reduced protein degradation. Interestingly, these differentially abundant proteins comprised 116 proteins (41%) that are predicted targets of the selective autophagy proteins p62, LC3 and ATG16L1. Our integrative analysis revealed autophagy-mediated mechanisms that degrade key proteins in Paneth cell functions, such as exocytosis, apoptosis and DNA damage repair. Transcriptomic profiling of additional organoids confirmed that 90% of the observed changes upon autophagy alteration have effects at the protein level, not on gene expression. We performed further validation experiments showing differential lysozyme secretion, confirming our computationally inferred downregulation of exocytosis. Our observations could explain how protein-level alterations affect Paneth cell homeostatic functions upon autophagy impairment.This article has an associated First Person interview with the joint first authors of the paper.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics; selective autophagy; crohn’s disease, Paneth cells; atg16l1; intestinal organoids

### Affiliations
Chair in Infection and Global Health, Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, UK
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Hiscox
Chair in Infection and Global Health, Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, UK


