### Accession
PXD010272

### Title
Pro-inflammatory remodeling of high density lipoprotein (HDL) precedes development of dyslipidemia and hepatic steatosis upon exposure to four weeks of high fat diet

### Description
Long-term high fat feeding leads to hepatic steatosis, dyslipidemia, and a pro-inflammatory state. In a previous study, we observed this dysregulated metabolic phenotype when C57BL/6 mice were fed a high fat diet (HFD) for sixteen weeks. Additionally, a five-fold increase in liver gene expression of serum amyloid A-1 (SAA-1), an acute phase response protein that associates with high density lipoprotein (HDL), was observed. Inflammation induced changes composition may alter HDL functions, including anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and reverse cholesterol transport properties. Diet-induced onset and progression of HDL dysfunction is poorly understood. To examine the relationship between high fat diet and HDL dysfunction, we performed a short-term diet study. Four-week high fat feeding caused an increase in total plasma cholesterol compared with mice fed normal control diet (ND). No change in plasma triglycerides or development of hepatic steatosis was observed. These mice did however show evidence for increase in acute phase reactants, with a 3.25-fold increase in SAA-1 expression in liver. Heavy water labelling was used to determine the turnover rates of proteins associated with HDL. High fat diet resulted in increased fractional catabolic rate (HFD vs ND) of several acute phase response proteins involved ininnate immunity , including – Complement C3 (7.06 ± 0.99 vs 5.20 ± 0.56 %/h, p < 0.005), complement factor B (6.17 ± 0.59 vs 5.09 ± 0.87 %/h, p < 0.05), complement Factor H (4.16 ± 0.41 vs 3.56 ± 0.36 %/h, p < 0.05), and Complement factor I (3.50 ± 0.26 vs 2.75 ± 0.14 %/h, p < 0.005). Our findings suggest that early immune response-induced inflammatory remodeling of HDL precedes the diet-induced steatosis and dyslipidemia. Early HDL dysfunction reflected on impaired reverse cholesterol transport likely results in increase in plasma cholesterol in the absence of other lipid abnormalities.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics samples were prepared after homogenization of cardiac  tissue and fractionation of total protein mixture on SDS-PAGE. The eight selected gel bands (14-170 kD) were in-gel digested using trypsin and analyzed by high resolution LC-MS

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, all the MS/MS spectra obtained from the mass spectrometer were transformed into a MZML peak list file using ProteoWizard MSconvert (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/tools), and the MZML file was searched using the Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK) software. A custom-built software application (http://ispace.utmb.edu/users/rgsadygo/proteomics/heavywater) was employed to calculate 2H isotopic enrichment in the proteins of interest.. Each samples were run twice at the same LC parameters. Some replicates were performed with MS1 scans only, which allows to increase the accuracy of the isotopomers ratios in conjugation with the data-dependent replicate for the same sample. These replicates runs with only MS1 scans are marked with the MS1 extension in the file names.

### Publication Abstract
Mice fed a high-fat diet for 12 weeks or longer develop hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and fatty liver. Additionally, a high-fat diet induces inflammation that remodels and affects the anti-inflammatory and antiatherogenic property of the high-density lipoprotein (HDL). However, the precise time course of metabolic disease progression and HDL remodeling remains unclear. Short-term (four weeks) high-fat feeding (60% fat calories) was performed in wild-type male C57BL/6J mice to gain insights into the early metabolic disease processes in conjunction with a HDL proteome dynamics analysis using a heavy water metabolic labeling approach. The high-fat diet-fed mice developed hyperglycemia, impaired glucose tolerance, hypercholesterolemia without hypertriglyceridemia or hepatic steatosis. A plasma HDL proteome dynamics analysis revealed increased turnover rates (and reduced half-lives) of several acute-phase response proteins involved in innate immunity, including complement C3 (12.77 &#xb1; 0.81 vs. 9.98 &#xb1; 1.20 h, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.005), complement factor B (12.71 &#xb1; 1.01 vs. 10.85 &#xb1; 1.04 h, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05), complement Factor H (19.60 &#xb1; 1.84 vs. 16.80 &#xb1; 1.58 h, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05), and complement factor I (25.25 &#xb1; 1.29 vs. 19.88 &#xb1; 1.50 h, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.005). Our findings suggest that an early immune response-induced inflammatory remodeling of the plasma HDL proteome precedes the diet-induced steatosis and dyslipidemia.

### Keywords
High, Plasma, Hepatic, Lipoprotien, Diet, Liver, Dyslipidemia, Fat, Inflammation, Density, Steatosis

### Affiliations
Neomed
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences Northeast Ohio Medical University Rootstown, OH, USA MTD project_title Proteome dynamics in dogs with heart failure

### Submitter
Serguei Ilchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Takhar Kasumov
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences Northeast Ohio Medical University Rootstown, OH, USA MTD project_title Proteome dynamics in dogs with heart failure


