### Accession
PXD016373

### Title
Label free quantification of S. aureus treated with sub-lethal dose of a novel antibiotic

### Description
In this project we investigated the effect of sub lethal doses of the novel antibiotic 3-bromo-PP on the proteome of S. aureus Mu50.

### Sample Protocol
Sample clean-up for LC–MS.  After in-solution digestion (ISD) peptides were desalted on home-made C18 StageTips. Briefly, the peptide solution was passed over the MeOH pre-conditioned and 0.5% FA equilibrated StageTip. Immobilized peptides were then washed twice with 0.5% (v/v) FA. Washed peptides were eluted from the StageTips with 80% (v/v) ACN 0.5% (v/v) FA and dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). Before LC-MS peptide samples were resuspended in 10 µl 0.1% (v/v) FA. LC-MS/MS LC–MS/MS Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 45 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (15 µm, New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.5–0.6 µl min-1). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 140 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 (gradient: start with 7% B; gradient 7 to 35% B for 120 min; gradient 35–100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 10 min). The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software, Thermo Fischer Scientific, UK (version 2.2 SP1.48) and was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300–1,800 and at a resolution of 60,000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (1.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 100 ms), where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition, dynamic ion exclusion was set to 120 s with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS (the orbitrap), monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein identification using MaxQuant and Perseus RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda search in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the default settings. Label-free quantification was activated. MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot Staphylococcus aureus strain Mu50 reference proteome database (UP000002481_158878.fasta ; 2714 entries; downloaded 23.02.2017). All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 sequences). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with Iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides with dynamic modifications were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Further data analysis and filtering of the MaxQuant output was done in Perseus v1.5.5.3 . MS/MS counts were loaded into the matrix from the proteinGroups.txt file and potential contaminants as well as reverse hits, hits only identified by site and protein groups with less than 2 identified unique peptides were removed. For the statistical calculations samples technical replicates were grouped in categorical groups and filtered. Only those protein groups were kept that contained three valid values in a minimum of one categorical group. The missing values in the remaining protein groups were then imputed and the t-test perfomed (number of randomizatons 250; initial FDR 0.05 and S0 0.1).

### Publication Abstract
Due to a high unresponsiveness to chemotherapy, biofilm formation is an important medical problem that frequently occurs during infection with many bacterial pathogens. In this study, the marine sponge-derived natural compounds 4,6-dibromo-2-(2',4'-dibromophenoxy)phenol and 3,4,6-tribromo-2-(2',4'-dibromophenoxy)phenol were found to exhibit broad antibacterial activity against medically relevant gram-positive and gram-negative pathogens. The compounds were not only bactericidal against both replicating and stationary phase-persistent planktonic cells of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa; they also killed biofilm-incorporated cells of both species while not affecting biofilm structural integrity. Moreover, these compounds were active against carbapenemase-producing Enterobacter sp. This simultaneous activity of compounds against different growth forms of both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria is rare. Genome sequencing of spontaneous resistant mutants and proteome analysis suggest that resistance is mediated by downregulation of the bacterial EIIBC phosphotransferase components scrA and mtlA in MRSA likely leading to a lower uptake of the molecules. Due to their only moderate cytotoxicity against human cell lines, phenoxyphenols provide an interesting new scaffold for development of antimicrobial agents with activity against planktonic cells, persisters and biofilm-incoporated cells of ESKAPE pathogens. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; Brominated phenoxyphenols kill actively replicating and biofilm-incorporated bacteria. &#x2022; Phosphotransferase systems mediate uptake of brominated phenoxyphenols. &#x2022; Downregulation of phosphotransferase systems mediate resistance.

### Keywords
Antibiotic, Label free quantification, Mrsa, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


