### Accession
PXD043859

### Title
The IP-MS results of anti-strep and protein A/G in VdΔulpb/Strep-SUMO strain

### Description
To identify SUMO-modified proteins and determine the potential SUMO-specific protease target, we first transformed a Strep-VdSUMO construct into VdΔulpb to create the VdΔulpb/Strep-SUMO strain for immunoprecipitation with anti-Strep and protein A/G magnetic beads as negtive control. An anti-Strep-IPed sample was used for mass spectrometry (MS), and twenty-one potential proteins were obtained.

### Sample Protocol
The protein bands were cut from the gel and digested by trypsin to generate peptide mixture and dried by Speed-vac. The dried peptides samples were resuspended in a solvent of 0.1% formic acid (v/v)subjected to an EASY-nLC 1000 interfaced via a Nanospray Flex ion source to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The peptides were loaded onto a trap column (C18, 3μm particles, 100μm ID, 3 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and separated using an analytical column (C18, 1.9μm particles, 150μm ID, 15 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 400 500 nL/min with a 60 min LC gradient composed of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid (v/v)) and Solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (v/v)). The gradient was 3-8% B for 5 min, 8-20% B for 40min, 20-35% B for 10 min, 35-80% B for 3 min, and finally 8090% B for 2 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode, in which the precursor MS1 scan (m/z 350–1550) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution setting of 120,000, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS/MS and ITHCD-MS/MS of the 20 most abundant multiply charged precursors in the MS1 spectrum.MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000.

### Publication Abstract
The soil-borne fungus Verticillium dahliae, the most notorious plant pathogen of the Verticillium genus, causes vascular wilts in a wide variety of economically important crops. The molecular mechanism of V. dahliae pathogenesis remains largely elusive. Here, we identify a small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-specific protease (VdUlpB) from V. dahliae, and find that VdUlpB facilitates V. dahliae virulence by deconjugating SUMO from V. dahliae enolase (VdEno). We identify five lysine residues (K96, K254, K259, K313 and K434) that mediate VdEno SUMOylation, and SUMOylated VdEno preferentially localized in nucleus where it functions as a transcription repressor to inhibit the expression of an effector VdSCP8. Importantly, VdUlpB mediates deSUMOylation of VdEno facilitates its cytoplasmic distribution, which allows it to function as a glycolytic enzyme. Our study reveals a sophisticated pathogenic mechanism of VdUlpB-mediated enolase deSUMOylation, which fortifies glycolytic pathway for growth and contributes to V. dahliae virulence through derepressing the expression of an effector.

### Keywords
Verticillium dahliae, Sumoylation, Enolase, Effector, Vdulpb

### Affiliations
CAS
Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
bosen zhang

### Lab Head
Dr huishan guo
CAS


