### Accession
PXD022321

### Title
Disturbed intramitochondrial phosphatidic acid transport impairs cellular stress signaling

### Description
Lipid transfer proteins of the Ups1/PRELID1 family facilitate the transport of phospholipids across the intermembrane space of mitochondria in a lipid-specific manner. Heterodimeric complexes of yeast Ups1/Mdm35 or human PRELID1/TRIAP1 shuttle phosphatidic acid (PA) synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the inner membrane, where it is converted to cardiolipin (CL), the signature phospholipid of mitochondria. Loss of Ups1/PRELID1 proteins impairs the accumulation of CL and broadly affects mitochondrial structure and function. Unexpectedly and unlike yeast cells lacking the cardiolipin synthase Crd1, Ups1 deficient yeast cells exhibit glycolytic growth defects, pointing to functions of Ups1-mediated PA transfer beyond CL synthesis. Here, we show that the disturbed intramitochondrial transport of PA in ups1 cells leads to altered phospholipid composition of the ER membrane, independent of disturbances in CL synthesis. The impaired flux of PA into mitochondria is associated with the increased synthesis of phosphatidylcholine (PC) and a reduced phosphatidylethanolamine (PE)/PC ratio in the ER of ups1 cells which suppresses the unfolded protein response (UPR). Moreover, we observed inhibition of TORC1 signaling in these cells. Activation of either UPR by ER protein stress or of TORC1 signaling by disruption of its negative regulator, the SEACIT complex, increased cytosolic protein synthesis and restored glycolytic growth of ups1 cells. These results demonstrate that PA influx into mitochondria is required to preserve ER membrane homeostasis and that its disturbance is associated with impaired glycolytic growth and cellular stress signaling.

### Sample Protocol
1 OD600 units of cells were lysed in 40 µL of 2% SDC in 100 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.0] and lysate was cleared by centrifugation (12,000 rpm, 10 min, 25°C). Supernatant was subjected to protein concentration determination. In total 30 µg of protein were used for protein digestion. Proteins were reduced and alkylated by TCEP (10 mM) and CAA (20 mM) for 60 min at 45°C. 1 µg of LysC endopeptidase was added and incubated at 37°C or 2h followed by addition of 1 µg of Trypsin for digestion at 37°C for 16h. Digestion was stopped by addition of TFA to a final concentration of 0.5%. Lysates were cleared (SDC precipitates) by centrifugation and the supernatant was subjected for desalting using the StageTip (material: SDB-RPS, Affinisep) technique (68). To generate the peptide spectral library, 2 µL of each sample (all conditions pooled 1:1) was pooled and subjected to high pH reversed phase chromatography. The instrumentation consisted out of a ZirconiumTM Ultra HPLC and a PAL RTC autosampler. The buffer systems consisted out of two buffers. A) 10 mM ammonium hydroxide and B) 80% acetonitrile and 10 mM ammonium hydroxide. Peptides were separated according to their hydrophobicity using an in-house packed column (length = 40 cm, inner diameter = 200 µm, 2.7-µm beads, PoroShell, Agilent Technologies) column. The instrument communicated and were controlled using the software Chronos (Axel Semrau GmbH). The gradient length was 60 min and in total 12 fractions were collected (1/60 s) and subsequently concentrated using a SpeedVac to complete dryness. Peptides were dissolved in 10 µl 2% formic acid, 2.5% acetonitrile of which 3 µL were injected per LC-MS/MS run. Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) For the MS/MS spectra library generation, the QExactive HF-x operated in a Top22 data-dependent mode. MS1 spectra were acquired in a mass range of 350–1,750 m/z, using an AGC target of 3 × 106 and a resolution at 200 m/z of 60,000. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 15,000 resolution using an AGC target of 5 × 105 and a maximal injection time of 22 ms. For DIA measurements, MS1 spectra were acquired using a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target of 1 × 106. For MS/MS independent spectra acquisition, 48 windows were acquired at an isolation m/z range of 15 Th and the isolation windows overlapped by 1 Th. The isolation center range covered a mass range of 385–1,043 m/z. Fragmentation spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z using a maximal injection time of 22 ms and stepped normalized collision energies (NCE) of 24, 27, 30. The default charge state was set to 4.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics and data analysis for proteomics The MS/MS data dependent spectra library was analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 and the implemented Andromeda search engine using default settings. The spectra were correlated against the Uniprot reference Yeast proteome (downloaded 06.2019). The output txt folder was then used to build the spectral library in Spectronaut. DIA runs were analyzed using default settings. The data were exported in pivot-table format and further processed in Perseus (70). For pairwise comparison a two-sided t-test was utilized. The FDR was calculated by a permutation-based approach using 500 permutations and a fudge factor s0 of 0.1 A protein was considered to be significantly differently expressed at a FDR of 5%. Not cutoff for the fold change was considered. 1D enrichments were performed in Perseus software using the Gene Ontology (GO) annotations of the Uniprot database. The Yeast GO-slim list was obtained from the Saccharomyces Genome Database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrion, Yeast, Usp1

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis  Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b  50931 Cologne
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis  Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b  50931 Cologne


