### Accession
PXD014790

### Title
Surfaceome dynamics and surface trafficking during neuronal development and synaptic plasticity

### Description
Surface proteins are of fundamental importance for formation of synaptic connections and activity-dependent plasticity. Here, we used a spatiotemporally resolved cell-surface proteotype analysis to characterize the neuronal surface-exposed proteome, or surfaceome, during neuronal development and synapse formation in primary neuronal cultures. We established a map of the neuronal surfaceome, which includes about 1,000 surface proteins, and analyzed the dynamic remodeling of the quantitative surfaceome during development. We identified time-resolved surface-abundance profile clusters that correspond to distinct stages of neuronal development. We discovered that surface abundance changes can correlate with or be uncoupled from the total cellular abundance. Finally, we observed system-wide surfaceome modulation in response to homeostatic synaptic scaling and exocytosis of diverse cargo during long-term potentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (100 mM Tris, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP, 15 mM 2-chloroacetamide) by repeated sonication using a VialTweeter (Hielscher Ultrasonics), and heated to 95 °C for 5 min. Proteins were digested with LysC (Wako Chemicals) and trypsin overnight at 37 °C using an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:200. In order to inactivate trypsin and precipitate deoxycholate, samples were boiled for 20 min, acidified with 10% formic acid to approximately pH 3, and centrifuged 10 min at 16,000 g. Peptide concentrations were determined in the supernatant using a NanoDrop 2000 instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and normalized before aliquoting into a 96-well sample plate for automated processing. For total proteotype analysis, a fraction of the digested proteins was separated and desalted for LC-MS/MS analysis as described below. Automated processing A Versette liquid handling robot (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Peltier element was used to adjust the temperature within 96-well plates during glycopeptide elution. Streptavidin tips were prepared by pushing a bottom filter membrane into disposable automation tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each tip was filled with 80 µl of Pierce Streptavidin Plus UltraLink Resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and tips were sealed by compressing the resin with a top filter membrane. Assembled tips were attached to the liquid handling robot and washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate by repeated cycles of aspiration and dispensing (mixing). Biotinylated peptides were bound to the streptavidin resin over 2.5 h of mixing cycles. Subsequently the streptavidin tips were sequentially washed with 5 M NaCl, StimLys Buffer (100 mM NaCl, 100 mM glycerol, 50 mM Tris, 1% Triton X-100), with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 100 mM NaHCO3 (pH 11), and with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. For glycopeptide elution, streptavidin tips were incubated overnight in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 1,000 units PNGase F (New England Biolabs) at 37 °C. The sample plate was then removed from the liquid handling robot and acidified to pH 2–3 with formic acid. Peptides were desalted with C18 UltraMicroSpin columns (The Nest Group) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of DIA LC-MS/MS LC-MS/MS DIA runs were analyzed with Spectronaut Pulsar X version 12 (Biognosys)35,36 using default settings. Briefly, a spectral library was generated from pooled samples measured in DDA as described above. The collected DDA spectra were searched against UniprotKB (UniProt reference proteome including isoforms for Rattus norvegicus, retrieved September 2018) using the Sequest HT search engine within Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). We allowed up to two missed cleavages and semi-specific tryptic digestion. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification for cysteine, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of arginine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The identified proteins were assessed using Percolator and filtered using the high peptide confidence setting in Protein Discoverer. Analysis results were then imported to Spectronaut Pulsar version 12 (Biognosys) for the generation of spectral libraries. Targeted data extraction of DIA-MS acquisitions was performed with Spectronaut version 12 (Biognosys AG) with default settings as previously described35,36. The proteotypicity filter “only protein group specific” was applied. Extracted features were exported from Spectronaut using “Quantification Data Filtering” for statistical analysis with MSstats (version 3.8.6)86 using default settings. Briefly, features were filtered for use for calculation of Protein Group Quantity as defined in Spectronaut settings, common contaminants were excluded. For autoCSC, the presence of consensus NXS/T sequence including a deamidation (+0.98 Da) at asparagine was required. For each protein, features were log-transformed and fitted to a mixed effect linear regression model for each sample in MSstats86. In MSstats, the model estimated fold change and statistical significance for all compared conditions. Significantly different proteins were determined by the threshold |fold-change| > 1.5 and adjusted p-value < 0.05. Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to account for multiple testing. In the comparison of all developmental time points with each other, p-value adjustment was performed on surface proteins with a |fold-change| > 1.5. Protein abundance per sample or condition was used for further analysis and plotting. The neurodevelopmental time series autoCSC experiment was performed with three biological replicates for 10 time points, one sample from 4 DIV was excluded due to technical error, generating 29 samples for final quantification for autoCSC. Homeostatic scaling autoCSC experiment was performed with seven biological replicates per condition, outliers were removed to generate 18 samples for final quantification. The cLTP autoCSC experiment was performed with twelve biological replicates per condition generating 24 samples for final quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Neurons are highly compartmentalized cells with tightly controlled subcellular protein organization. While brain transcriptome, connectome and global proteome maps are being generated, system-wide analysis of temporal protein dynamics at the subcellular level are currently lacking. Here, we perform a temporally-resolved surfaceome analysis of primary neuron cultures and reveal dynamic surface protein clusters that reflect the functional requirements during distinct stages of neuronal development. Direct comparison of surface and total protein pools during development and homeostatic synaptic scaling demonstrates system-wide proteostasis-independent remodeling of the neuronal surface, illustrating widespread regulation on the level of surface trafficking. Finally, quantitative analysis of the neuronal surface during chemical long-term potentiation (cLTP) reveals fast externalization of diverse classes of surface proteins beyond the AMPA receptor, providing avenues to investigate the requirement of exocytosis for LTP. Our resource (neurosurfaceome.ethz.ch) highlights the importance of subcellular resolution for systems-level understanding of cellular processes.

### Keywords
Synapse, Neuroproteomics, Spatial, Surfaceome, Surface

### Affiliations
Biomedical Proteomics Platform, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Institute of Molecular Systems Biology at the Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich 8093, Switzerland
Max-Planck-Institute for Brain Research

### Submitter
Marc van Oostrum

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Wollscheid
Biomedical Proteomics Platform, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Institute of Molecular Systems Biology at the Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich 8093, Switzerland


