### Accession
PXD039939

### Title
Identification of Cross-linking partners of BpA modified p97 by photo cross-linking MS

### Description
We wanted to see where and how the protein p97 interacts with its partner proteins p37, PPI,Sds22 and I3. To this end a p97 derivative with genetically encoded crosslinking amino acid (p-benzoyl-L-phenylalanine) was generated. After incubation with the partner proteins, photocross-linking and tryptic digest the resulting cross-linked peptides were analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC/MS/MS. Sample preparation essentially followed the SP3 protocoll published by Hughes et al in 2019 (doi: 10.1038/s41596-018-0082-x). A volume corresponding to 30 µg of protein from each cross-linking sample was taken up in 100 µL 1× SP3 Lysis Buffer (final concentrations: 5% (wt/vol) SDS; 10 mM TCEP; 200 μL 40 mM Chloracetamide; 200 mM HEPES pH 8) and heated for 5 min at 90°C. After cooling the samples to room temperature (on ice) a mix of 150 µg hydrophobic (#65152105050250) and 150 µg hydrophilic (#45152105050250) SeraMag Speed Beads (Cytiva) was added to the denatured and alkylated protein containing solution (bead to protein ratio 10 to 1) and gently mixed. Then 1 volume of 100% vol/vol Ethanol (EtOH) was added and the protein/bead/EtOH suspension was then incubated for 20 min at 24°C on a Thermomixer C (Eppendorf) while shaking at 1200 rpm. After this binding step, the beads collected on a magnet washed 4× with 80% EtOH (collection time on the magnet minimum of 4 min). After the final wash & collect step the beads were taken up in 25 mM Ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC) containing 1 µg Trypsin (Protein:Trypsin ratio 30:1). To help bead dissociation samples were incubated for 5 min in a Sonification bath (preheated to 37°C). After this step samples were transferred to a Thermomixer C (preheated to 37°C and incubated over night while shaking at 1300 rpm. Next morning the samples were acidified with formic acid (FA, final 1% vol/vol). The beads were collected on a magnet and the supernatant transferred to a fresh Eppendorf tube. The samples were than put again on a magnet for at least 5 min to remove remaining beads. The cleared tryptic digests were then desalted on home-made C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Briefly, peptides were immobilized and washed on a 2 disc StageTip. After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 0.1% formic acid solution (10 μL) and directly used for LC-MS/MS experiments (see below for details).  LC-MS/MS settings. MS Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap LUMOS instrument (Thermo) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo). The UPLC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 46 cm) with an integrated fritted emitter (CoAnn Technologies) packed in-house with Aeris 2.6 core shell beads (Phenomenex). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation PRSO-V2) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was set to 50 °C during sample loading and data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.2% FA, 2% Acetonitrile, ACN, 97.8% H2O) and solvent B (0.2% FA, 80% ACN, 19.8% H2O). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Honewell). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.3 – 0.5 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 240 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 2% B; gradient 2% to 6% B for 12 min; gradient 6% to 25% B for 150 min; gradient 25% to 40% B for 54 min; 40% to 100% B for 2 min; 100% for 22 min) at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was controlled by the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tune Application (version 3.3.2782.28) and operated using the Xcalibur software (version 4.3.73.11). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (OTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 370-1600 and at a resolution of 120000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen et al. 2005). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the OTMS in a variable scan range (“auto”) and at resolution 30000. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 2.3 kV. Source fragmentation was turned off. Peptides were analyzed using a “Top Speed” regime (repeating cycle of full precursor ion scan (AGC target “150%” or 100 ms) followed by dependent MS2 scans for 5 seconds (minimum intensity threshold 5×104)). The precursor ions were isolated using the quadrupole (isolation window 1.4 m/z). After Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) (normalized collision mode set to “stepped” and normalized collision energy set to “27, 30, 35%”) the product ions were measured in the OTMS (AGC target “30000” or 200 ms, mass range “normal” with AGC set to 150%). During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 30 seconds. Only charge states between 3-7 were

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification using StavroX. Thermo RAW files were converted to mzML using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 and submitted to StavroX (v3.6.6.) for further analysis. For each search a dedicated database containing only the sequences of the investigated proteins was used. BpA modified amino acids were indicated by “x”. In StavroX we used the following settings: Amino acids: the default amino acid table complemented by the entry for BpA (“x”; composition C16H13NO2; Mass 251.0946). Protease sites: C-terminal at Lys and Arg (both blocked as XL site) with max. 3 missed cleavages. Modifications: static modification: alkylation of Cys by IAA, variable modification: oxidation of M. Crosslinker: table complemented with entry for BPA (max. Distance 30 Å; Site1: x; Site 2: all natural amino acids and N/Ctermini; mass: 0.0). Mass Composition: precursor precision 5 ppm, Fragment ion precision 5 ppm, lower mass limit, 200 Da, upper mass limit 6000 Da, signal-to-noise ratio: 2, Ion types b,y,c,z with deisotoping was turned on. Score & FDR: precursor was not activated; FDR cutoff: 5%, score cutoff: 0. Decoy database was generated using shuffled sequences with kept protease sites.

### Publication Abstract
The AAA+-ATPase p97 (also called VCP or Cdc48) unfolds proteins and disassembles protein complexes in numerous cellular processes, but how substrate complexes are loaded onto p97 and disassembled is unclear. Here, we present cryo-EM structures of p97 in the process of disassembling a protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) complex by extracting an inhibitory subunit from PP1. We show that PP1 and its partners SDS22 and inhibitor-3 (I3) are loaded tightly onto p97, surprisingly via a direct contact of SDS22 with the p97 N-domain. Loading is assisted by the p37 adapter that bridges two adjacent p97 N-domains underneath the substrate complex. A stretch of I3 is threaded into the central channel of the spiral-shaped p97 hexamer, while other elements of I3 are still attached to PP1. Thus, our data show how p97 arranges a protein complex between the p97 N-domain and central channel, suggesting a hold-and-extract mechanism for p97-mediated disassembly.

### Keywords
Bpa crosslinking, Aaa protease, P97

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


