### Accession
PXD010307

### Title
QCMAP Brain proteomics data -  QCMAP: An Interactive Web-Tool for Performance Diagnosis and Prediction of LC-MS Systems

### Description
we developed a web-based application (QCMAP) for interactive diagnosis and prediction of the per-formance of LC-MS systems across different biological sample types. Leveraging on a standardized HeLa sample run in Sydney MS core facility, we trained predictive models on a panel of commonly used performance factors to pinpoint the precise conditions to a (un)satisfactory performance in three LC-MS systems. Next, we demonstrated that the learned model can be applied to predict LC-MS system performance for brain samples generated from an independent study. By compiling these predictive models into our web-application, QCMAP allows users to supply their own samples to benchmark the performance of their LC-MS systems and identify key factors for instrument opti-misation.. To demonstrate this, we obtained 10 datasets generated on a QECl instrument from mouse brain samples with different levels of quality.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 8M guanidine, 100 mM Tris containing 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40 mM chloroacetamide, pH 8.5 by tip-probe sonication and protein precipitated with 5 volumes of acetone overnight at -30°C. Protein was digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (1:50 enzyme: substrate ratio) in 10% (v/v) trifluoroethanol, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.9 overnight at 37°C. Peptides were desalted with tC18 solid-phase extraction cartridges and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were resuspended in 3% (v/v) acetonitrile / 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and quantified with Qubit fluorescence to normalize peptides to 1 µg/3 µl for direct injection. Peptides were separated on in-house made 75 μm inner diameter columns packed with ReproSil Pur 120 C18AQ stationary phase (1.9 μm, Dr, Maisch GmbH, Germany). Column length varied between 30-50 cm and were maintained at 60°C. All samples were separated on identical chromatography conditions consisting of a linear gradient of 5% to 30% buffer B over 95 mins at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (buffer A= 0.1% formic acid; buffer B= 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The three LC-MS platforms consisted of an Easy nLC1000 couple to a Q-Exactive classic, a Dionex Ultimate 3500 coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus and an Easy nLC1200 coupled to a Q-Exactive HF. MS settings were identical between the platforms with a survey scan of 350-1550 m/z acquired (7e4 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 100 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS of upto 10 of the most abundant ions (1.75e4 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 25 ms injection. Ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed through MaxQuant (v1.5.3.3) with all default settings with peak properties enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The increasing role played by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based proteomics in biological discovery has led to a growing need for quality control (QC) on the LC-MS systems. While numerous quality control tools have been developed to track the performance of LC-MS systems based on a pre-defined set of performance factors (e.g., mass error, retention time), the precise influence and contribution of the performance factors and their generalization property to different biological samples are not as well characterized. Here, a web-based application (QCMAP) is developed for interactive diagnosis and prediction of the performance of LC-MS systems across different biological sample types. Leveraging on a standardized HeLa cell sample run as QC within a multi-user facility, predictive models are trained on a panel of commonly used performance factors to pinpoint the precise conditions to a (un)satisfactory performance in three LC-MS systems. It is demonstrated that the learned model can be applied to predict LC-MS system performance for brain samples generated from an independent study. By compiling these predictive models into our web-application, QCMAP allows users to benchmark the performance of their LC-MS systems using their own samples and identify key factors for instrument optimization. QCMAP is freely available from: http://shiny.maths.usyd.edu.au/QCMAP/.

### Keywords
Brain, Proteomics, Quality control

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


