### Accession
PXD020245

### Title
Proteomics analysis of inflammation mouse intestine model and Caco2 cells

### Description
Proteomics analysis of a mouse model for intestinal inflammation (IBD) and Caco2 cells used as inflammation model.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 2% SDS and subjected to multi-enzyme digestion filter-aided sample preparation (MED-FASP) protocol, where proteins were digested with LysC and trypsin. Peptides were quantified using a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS data was processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16), where proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against the mouse UniProtKB (UP000000589) or human UniProtKB (UP000005640). Spectral raw intensities were normalized with variance stabilization (vsn), and were subsequently used to calculate the protein concentrations using the Total Protein Approach.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic condition resulting in impaired intestinal homeostasis. Current practices for diagnosis of IBD are challenged by invasive, demanding procedures. We hypothesized that proteomics analysis could provide a powerful tool for identifying clinical biomarkers for non-invasive IBD diagnosis. Here, the global intestinal proteomes from commonly used in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo models of IBD were analyzed to identify apical and luminal proteins that can be targeted by orally delivered diagnostic agents. Global proteomics analysis revealed upregulated plasma membrane proteins in intestinal segments of proximal- and distal colon from dextran sulfate sodium-treated mice and also in inflamed human intestinal Caco-2&#xa0;cells pretreated with pro-inflammatory agents. The upregulated colon proteins in mice were compared to the proteome of the healthy ileum, to ensure targeting of diagnostic agents to the inflamed colon. Promising target proteins for future investigations of non-invasive diagnosis of IBD were found in both systems and included Tgm2/TGM2, Icam1/ICAM1, Ceacam1/CEACAM1, and Anxa1/ANXA1. Ultimately, these findings will guide the selection of appropriate antibodies for surface functionalization of imaging agents aimed to target inflammatory biomarkers in situ.

### Keywords
Mouse, Caco2 cells, Ibd, Inflammation, Colon, Ileum

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy Uppsala University Box 580 SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Christine Wegler

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandra Teleki
Department of Pharmacy Uppsala University Box 580 SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden


