### Accession
PXD018429

### Title
The kinase Isr1 negatively regulates hexosamine biosynthesis in S. cerevisiae

### Description
The S. cerevisiae  ISR1 gene encodes a putative kinase with no ascribed function. Here, we show that Isr1 acts as a negative regulator of the highly conserved hexosamine biosynthesis pathway (HBP), which converts glucose into uridine diphosphate N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc), the carbohydrate precursor to protein glycosylation, GPI-anchor formation and chitin biosynthesis. Overexpression of Isr1 is lethal and, at lower levels, causes sensitivity to tunicamycin and resistance to calcofluor white, implying impaired protein glycosylation and reduced chitin deposition. GFA1 is the first enzyme in the HBP and is conserved from bacteria and yeast to humans. Isr1 lethality is rescued by overexpression of GFA1 or exogenous glucosamine, which bypasses GFA1's essential function. Gfa1 is phosphorylated in an ISR1-dependent fashion and mutation of Isr1-dependent sites ameliorates the lethality associated with Isr1 overexpression. Isr1 contains a phosphodegron that is phosphorylated by Pho85 and subsequently ubiquitinated by the SCF -Cdc4 complex, largely confining Isr1 protein levels to the time of bud emergence. Mutation of this phosphodegron stabilizes Isr1 and recapitulates the overexpression phenotypes.  As Pho85 is a cell cycle and nutrient responsive kinase, this tight regulation of Isr1 may serve to dynamically regulate flux through the HBP and modulate how the cell’s energy resources are converted into structural carbohydrates in response to changing cellular needs.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and sample preparation Cells were grown overnight in YM-1 supplemented with 2% raffinose and 100 μg/ml NAT and then inoculated at 0.3 OD. After 1 hour, 40% galactose was added to a final concentration of 2% galactose and cells were grown for an additional 3 hours to OD ~0.8. 40 OD of cells were washed 2x with water and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells pellets were combined and lysed in a denaturing urea buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 Roche mini protease inhibitor tablet without EDTA/10 ml, ½ Roche phosSTOP tablet/10 ml) using 14 × 1.5 min bursts on a BioSpec mini bead-beater at room temperature. 2 ml screw-cap tubes used for lysis were pierced with an 18-gauge needle and spun in a swinging bucket centrifuge for 30 s at 1000 × g to collect extract. Extract was rotated end-over-end for 30 min at room temperature before clarification via centrifugation at 17,000 × g for 7 min followed by a second centrifugation at 17,000 × g for 2 min, both at room temperature. Extracts were quantitated using a BCA protein quantification kit (Pierce). 1 M TCEP (Sigma C4706–2) was added to final concentration of 4 mM to 1 mg of protein and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. 0.5 M iodoacetamide (Sigma L1149–5G, prepared fresh in water) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated in the dark for 30 min. To quench excess iodoacetamide, 0.5 M DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM for another 30 min in the dark. Samples were diluted ∼fourfold (to less than 2 M urea) with 0.1 M Tris, pH 8, and Lys-C/trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, V5071, dissolved in 50 mM acetic acid) was added at a ratio of 200 ug trypsin to 1 mg total protein. Samples (∼1 ml total volume of diluted sample) were incubated for 20 hours at room temperature with rotation. After digestion, TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.3–0.1% TFA, with pH of final solution ~2. Phosphopeptide enrichment by immobilized metal affinity chromatography. Iron nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA) resin were prepared in-house by stripping metal ions from nickel nitrilotriacetic acid agarose resin (Qiagen) with 100 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic (EDTA) acid, pH 8.0 three times. Resin was washed twice with water and 100 mM iron(III) chloride was applied three times. The iron-NTA resin was washed twice with water and once with 0.5% formic acid. Iron-NTA beads were resuspended in water to create a 25% resin slurry. 60 µl of Fe-NTA resin slurry was transferred to individual Silica C18 MicroSpin columns (The Nest Group) pre-equilibrated with 100 µl of 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA on a vacuum manifold. Subsequent steps were performed with the Fe-NTA resin loaded on the Silica C18 columns. Peptide samples were mixed twice with the Fe-NTA resin and allowed to incubate for 2 minutes. The resin was rinsed four times with 200 µl of 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA. In order to equilibrate the chromatography columns, 200 µl of 0.5% formic acid was applied twice to the resin and columns. Peptides were eluted from the resin onto the C18 column by application of 200 µl of 500 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.0. Peptides were washed twice with 200 µl of 0.5% formic acid. The C18 columns were removed from the vacuum manifold and eluted twice by centrifugation at 1000g with 60 µl of 50% ACN, 0.25% TFA. Peptides were dried with a centrifugal adaptor and stored at -20C until analysis by liquid chromatograph and mass spectrometry. Proteomic data acquisition and analysis. Peptides were resuspened in 45 uL of 4% formic acid, 3% ACN, and 2uL was analyzed in on a Bruke timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry system equipped with an Bruker nanoElute high-pressure liquid chromatography system interfaced via a captiveSpray source. Samples were directly injected on a C18 reverse phase column (25 cm x 75 µm packed with ReprosilPur C18 AQ 1.9 um particles). Peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 2 to 28% ACN at 400nl/min over the course of a 120 acquisition. Each sample was injected twice, once with data-dependent PASEF acquisition to build a spectral library, and one via a diaPASEF acquisition for quantitative analysis.

### Data Protocol
All data-dependent PASEF files were search against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database (Downloaded from the Saccharomyces Genome Database January 13, 2015). Peptide and protein identification searches were performed with the Spectronaut Pulsar software (www.spectronaut.org) to generate a spectral library of detected phosphorylated peptides with a 1% false-discovery rate at the peptide and protein level.  Spectronaut was further used with the default settings to analyzed the diaPASEF data and extract quantitative regulation of detected phosphorylation sites.  Label-free quantification and statistical testing of phosphorylation sites was performed using the artMS R-package (version 1.3.7) (https://github.com/biodavidjm/artMS), and the MSstats statistical R-package (version 3.16.0) (64).  Instant Clue was used for figure generation of proteomics data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Timstof pro, Phosphoproteomics, Dia

### Affiliations
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Danielle Swaney
UCSF


