### Accession
PXD028923

### Title
The conformational state of PLCγ cSH2-linker contributes to Ibrutinib resistance

### Description
Mutations in PLCγ, a substrate of the tyrosine kinase BTK, are often found in patients who develop resistance to the BTK inhibitor Ibrutinib. However, the mechanisms by which these PLCγ mutations cause Ibrutinib resistance are unclear. Under normal signaling conditions, BTK mediated phosphorylation of Y783 within the PLCγ cSH2-linker promotes the intramolecular association of this site with the adjacent cSH2 domain resulting in active PLCγ. Thus, the cSH2-linker region in the center of the regulatory gamma specific array (γSA) of PLCγ is a key feature controlling PLCγ activity. Even in the unphosphorylated state this linker exists in a conformational equilibrium between free and bound to the cSH2 domain. The position of this equilibrium is optimized within the properly regulated PLCγ enzyme but may be altered in the context of mutations. We therefore assessed the conformational status of four resistance associated mutations within the PLCγ γSA and find that they each alter the conformational equilibrium of the γSA leading to a shift toward active PLCγ. Interestingly, two distinct modes of mutation induced activation are revealed by this panel of Ibrutinib resistance mutations. These findings, along with the recently determined structure of fully autoinhibited PLCγ, provide new insight into the nature of the conformational change that occurs within the γSA regulatory region to affect PLCγ activation. Improving our mechanistic understanding of how B cell signaling escapes Ibrutinib treatment via mutations in PLCγ will aid in the development of strategies to counter drug resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling:  All PLCγ constructs (γSA wild-type, ΔS729/E730, Y509H, P686S, S729Y as well as the ΔsPH fragment) were diluted from stock concentrations to 22 μM using 25 mM KH2PO4 pH 6.40, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT, H2O.  Deuterium labeling was initiated with a 36-fold dilution into D2O buffer (36 μL, 25 mM KH2PO4 pD 6.43, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT, 99.9% D2O).  After each labeling time (10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minutes, 1 hour, and 4 hours) at 21 °C (room temperature), the labeling reaction was quenched with the addition of 37 μL of ice-cold quenching buffer (150 mM potassium phosphate, pH 2.44, H2O) and analyzed immediately.   LC/MS:  Deuterated and control samples were digested online at 15 °C using an Waters Enzymate pepsin column (Waters, 186007233). The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min.  Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 6 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 μm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The back pressure averaged ~12,950 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water, 0.1% formic acid.  The error of determining the deuterium levels was ± 0.25 Da in this experimental setup.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the Enzymate column during each analytical run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z.  The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from replicate HDMSE analyses (as detailed in the Supplemental Data file 1) of undeuterated control samples using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters Corporation). Peptide masses were identified from searches using non-specific cleavage of a custom database containing the sequence of rat PLCγ1 γSA fragment (GS-D485-R936-His6, UniProt: P10686), no missed cleavages, no PTMs, a low energy threshold of 135, an elevated energy threshold of 35 and an intensity threshold of 500. No false discovery rate (FDR) control was performed.  The peptides identified in PLGS (excluding all neutral loss and in-source fragmentation identifications) were then filtered in DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation) implementing a minimum products per amino acid cut-off of 0.3, at least 3 consecutive product ions (see Supplemental Data file 1).  Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria to this point were further processed by DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation). The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by the software by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuterated form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were used to generate all uptake graphs and difference maps found in the Supplemental Datafile.  The error of determining the average deuterium incorporation for each peptide was at or below ± 0.25 Da. Deuterium levels were not corrected for back exchange and thus reported as relative [Wales & Engen (2015). Mass Spectrom Rev. 25(1), 158-170].

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in PLC&#x3b3;, a substrate of the tyrosine kinase BTK, are often found in patients who develop resistance to the BTK inhibitor Ibrutinib. However, the mechanisms by which these PLC&#x3b3; mutations cause Ibrutinib resistance are unclear. Under normal signaling conditions, BTK mediated phosphorylation of Y783 within the PLC&#x3b3; cSH2-linker promotes the intramolecular association of this site with the adjacent cSH2 domain resulting in active PLC&#x3b3;. Thus, the cSH2-linker region in the center of the regulatory gamma specific array (&#x3b3;SA) of PLC&#x3b3; is a key feature controlling PLC&#x3b3; activity. Even in the unphosphorylated state this linker exists in a conformational equilibrium between free and bound to the cSH2 domain. The position of this equilibrium is optimized within the properly regulated PLC&#x3b3; enzyme but may be altered in the context of mutations. We therefore assessed the conformational status of four resistance associated mutations within the PLC&#x3b3; &#x3b3;SA and find that they each alter the conformational equilibrium of the &#x3b3;SA leading to a shift toward active PLC&#x3b3;. Interestingly, two distinct modes of mutation induced activation are revealed by this panel of Ibrutinib resistance mutations. These findings, along with the recently determined structure of fully autoinhibited PLC&#x3b3;, provide new insight into the nature of the conformational change that occurs within the &#x3b3;SA regulatory region to affect PLC&#x3b3; activation. Improving our mechanistic understanding of how B cell signaling escapes Ibrutinib treatment via mutations in PLC&#x3b3; will aid in the development of strategies to counter drug resistance.

### Keywords
Plcγ; phospholipase c gamma; ibrutinib resistance; allostery; hdx-ms; hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry; nmr; sh2 domain.

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


