### Accession
PXD033471

### Title
Structure and dynamics of the essential endogenous mycobacterial polyketide synthase Pks13

### Description
Mycobacterium polyketide synthase 13 (Pks13) is a protein complex comprised of a closely symmetric parallel dimer of chains, each encoding several enzymatic and transport functions. This module carries out the condensation of two different very long chain fatty acids to produce mycolic acids that are essential components of the mycobacterial cell wall. Here, we use cryo-EM, XL-MS, and integrative modeling to determine the structure and domain trajectories of the dimeric multi-enzyme Pks13 purified endogenously from mycobacteria under normal growth conditions. Structures of the multi-domain assembly revealed by cryogenic electron microscopy (cryoEM) define the ketosynthase (KS), linker, and acyltransferase (AT) domains, each at atomic resolution (1.8Å), with bound substrates defined at 2.4Å and 2.9Å resolution. Image classification reveals two distinct structures with alternate locations of the N-terminal acyl carrier protein (termed ACP1a, ACP1b) seen at 3.6Å and 4.6Å resolution respectively. These two structures suggest plausible intermediate states, related by a ~60Å movement of ACP1, on the pathway for substrate delivery from the fatty acyl-ACP ligase (FadD32) to the ketosynthase domain. The linking sequence between ACP1 and the KS includes an 11 amino acid sequence with 6 negatively charged side chains that lies in different positively charged grooves on the KS in ACP1a versus ACP1b structures. This charge complementarity between the extended chain and the grooves suggests some stabilization of these two distinct orientations. Other domains are visible at lower resolution and indicate flexibility relative to the KS-AT core. The chemical structures of three bound endogenous long chain fatty acid substrates with their proximal regions defined in the structures were determined by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. The domain proximities were probed by chemical cross-linking and identified by mass spectrometry (XL-MS). These were incorporated into integrative structure modeling to define multiple domain configurations that transport the very long fatty acid chains throughout the multistep Pks13 mediated synthetic pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Pks13 protein complexes were purified from M. smegmatis and cross-linked with increasing amounts of DSSO solubilized in anhydrous DMSO. The first replicate was prepared in duplicate, with both replicates cross-linked for 30 min at 1000 RPM, one at 37°C and one at 4°C, with the following molar ratios of DSSO to complex: 1:10; 1:50; 1:250; and 1:1000.  Based on the similarity between DSSO cross-linking at 37°C and one at 4°C for Pks13, replicate 3 and 4 were cross-linked for 30 min at 1000 RPM at 37°C only with the following molar ratios: 1:50; 1:250; and 1:1000. Cross-linking reactions were quenched with 50 mM Tris pH 8, and then mixed with 4x SDS-PAGE loading buffer to a final 1x concentration (1x SDS-PAGE loading buffer: 62.5mM Tris pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 75mM DTT, 7.5% Glycerol, and 0.02% Bromophenol Blue). Protein samples were then separated by SDS-PAGE on 4-20% Criterion TGX gels (BioRad), stained by AcquaStain (Bulldog Bio) MS safe blue protein stain, and bands excised for in gel digest. Gel pieces were cut to 1mm2 cubes, dehydrated, rehydrated in 15mM TCEP, 25mM NH4HCO3 reducing buffer, and alkylated in 50mM chloroacetamide in the dark. Gel pieces were dehydrated and rehydrated in 0.5ng/μL trypsin buffer for protein digest. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with 50% acetonitrile (ACN), 5% formic acid (FA), dried, and resolubilized in 3% ACN, 2% FA. Resolubilized peptides were separated using an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a 75 μm × 30 cm fused silica IntregraFrit capillary column (New Objective) packed in-house with 1.9-μm Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ reverse-phase resin (Dr. Maisch-GmbH), or a 15 cm-long column containing 1.7 μm BEH beads (Waters). Peptides were eluted from Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ columns at 300nL/min using the following linear gradient: 50%–8% B in 5 min, 8%–45% B in 35 min, 45%-100% B in 12 min, 100% B for 5 min, 100%-2% B in 2 min, and 2% B for 2 min (mobile phase buffer A: 100% H2O, 0.1% FA; mobile phase buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA). Peptides were eluted from BEH columns at 300nL/min using the following linear gradient: 5%–22% B in 40 min, 22%–32% B in 5 min, 32%-100% B in 5 min, and 100% B for 10 min (mobile phase buffer A: 100% H2O, 0.1% FA; mobile phase buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA). Each sample was analyzed in technical duplicate by two independent MS3 methods on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in positive ion mode. In one method, a single acquisition cycle consisted of 9 scan events: 1) one full MS1 scan in the orbitrap (350–1200 m/z, 60,000 resolution, max injection time of 50 ms); 2) two data-dependent MS2 scans in the orbitrap (30,000 resolution, normalized AGC target at 200%, isolation window 1.6 m/z) with normalized collision energy set at 22% on the top two precursor ions; and 3) four MS3 scans in the ion trap (isolation window 2.5 m/z, standard AGC target, auto max injection time, rapid scan rate) with HCD collision energy set at 30% on the top 4 ions from each MS2 scan. In the second method, a single acquisition cycle was allowed 3 sec and consisted of: 1) full MS1 scan in the orbitrap (350–1200 m/z, 120,000 resolution, max injection time of 100 ms); 2) data-dependent MS2 scans in the orbitrap (30,000 resolution, normalized AGC target at 200%, isolation window 1.6 m/z) with normalized collision energy set at 22% on the top two precursor ions; and 3) four MS3 scans in the ion trap (isolation window 2.5 m/z, standard AGC target, auto max injection time, rapid scan rate) with HCD collision energy set at 30% on the top 4 ions from each MS2 scan. For both MS methods ions with charge state 4 to 8 were sampled for MS2 and dynamically excluded for 20 seconds (tolerance of 10 ppm), and ions with charge state 2 to 6 with precursor ions (5 m/z tolerance) excluded were selected for MS3.

### Data Protocol
MS2 and MS3 extracted peak files were generated using MSConvert (ProteoWizard). Extracted MS3.mgf files were searched and reported using BatchTag and SearchCompare software respectively from a locally installed version of ProteinProspector (v 6.2.17) which is run from a computational cluster. Parameter files used for all searches and reports are uploaded and called bt.xml and sc.xml respectively. Search results output as tab delimited text, MS2.mgf, and MS3.mgf files were analyzed to identify cross-linked peptides by a search tool called XLTools. Cross-linked peptides were summarized and filtered for integrative modeling by in-house scripts. Data was visualized using a combination of in-house scripts and modified files produced based on the xiNET software.

### Publication Abstract
The mycolic acid layer of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis cell wall is essential for viability and virulence, and the enzymes responsible for its synthesis are targets for antimycobacterial drug development. Polyketide synthase 13 (Pks13) is a module encoding several enzymatic and transport functions that carries out the condensation of two different long-chain fatty acids to produce mycolic acids. We determined structures by cryogenic-electron microscopy of dimeric multi-enzyme Pks13 purified from mycobacteria under normal growth conditions, captured with native substrates. Structures define the ketosynthase (KS), linker and acyl transferase (AT) domains at 1.8&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution and two alternative locations of the N-terminal acyl carrier protein. These structures suggest intermediate states on the pathway for substrate delivery to the KS domain. Other domains, visible at lower resolution, are flexible relative to the KS-AT core. The chemical structures of three bound endogenous long-chain fatty acid substrates were determined by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium, Xl-ms, Dsso, Polyketide synthase pks13

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, USA

### Submitter
Robyn Kaake

### Lab Head
Dr Robyn Midori Kaake
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, USA


