### Accession
PXD020982

### Title
MS/MS analysis of Ub-conjugated UbcH7 ubiquitination sites

### Description
By conducting the ubiquitin-conjugation assay for UbcH7, we found that PknG was able to promote the loading of Ub onto UbcH7, which is indicated by a molecular weight shift in SDS–PAGE. The classic Ub conjugation of E2s requires the E1 to form a thiol-ester bond between its active Cys and the C-terminal Gly of Ub. Notably, PknG could directly catalyze Ub conjugation onto UbcH7 in a kinase activity-independent and Ubl domain-dependent manner.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro ubiquitin conjugation assay of UbcH7 catalyzed by PknG, reaction products were separated by SDS-PAGE, gel slices containing the protein was detected by coomassie brilliant blue staining. Bands were excised from the SDS-PAGE gel, rinsed with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, dried and reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 56 ℃, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were then digested with 12.5 ng/ul trypsin overnight at room temperature. After trypsinization, the proteins were eluted from the gel by alternating four times between 50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid, and 50 mM sodium bicarbonate and an additional three times alternating between 100% acetonitrile and 50 mM NH4CO3. Samples were then desalted on a C18 ZipTip pipette tip (Millipore) and lyophilized for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Peptides were separated via Nano LC-nano MS/MS analysis on a NanoAcquity system (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS raw data were processed by using Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and searched against the customized Uniprot_M.tuberculosis_GNCC_2019 database. Peptide ubiquitination sites were identified via protein database searching of the resulting tandem mass spectra using Mascot. The Mascot search engine was used to identify ubiquitinated residues marked as LeuArgGlyGly (LRGG) or GlyGly (GG).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ms, Unconventional isopeptidase activitys

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology
CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China;

### Submitter
lu z

### Lab Head
Dr Cuihua Liu
CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China;


