### Accession
PXD001047

### Title
Additional precursor purification in isobaric mass tagging experiments by traveling wave ion mobility separation (TWIMS).

### Description
We investigated if additional peptide purification by traveling wave ion mobility separation (TWIMS) can reduce precursor contamination using a mixture of S. cerevisiae and HeLa proteomes. In accordance with previous reports on FAIMS-Orbitrap instruments, we find that TWIMS provides a remarkable improvement (on average 2.85 times) in signal to noise ratio for sequence ions. We also report, that TWIMS reduces reporter ions contamination by around one third (to 14 - 15% contamination) and even further (to 6-9%) when combined with narrowed quadrupole isolation window.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from 10 OD600 units of Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain YDL227C grown on YPD as described by von der Haar [PMID: 17957260]. 5x106HeLa HeLa cells were lysed by ultrasonication in RIPA buffer. Proteins from S.cerevisiae and HeLa were chloroform/methanol and acetone precipitated respectively, resuspended in 0.1% rapigest 50mM Hepes pH 8.5, quantified by BCA and digested as suggested by rapigest manufacturer (Waters corp). The peptides were labelled as suggested by TMT manufacturer (Thermo corp), but 50mM HEPES pH 8.5 was used instead of TEAB to avoid contamination.

### Data Protocol
Mgf-s for mascot search were created in PLGS 3.01. Mgfs were searched with Mascot 2.3.02 against combined S. cerevisiae and human database (Uniprot) with 10ppm mass tolerance for precursors and 0.05Da tolerance for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT6plex (K) and TMT6plex (N-term) were selected as fixed modifications and Oxidation (M) and TMT6plex (Y) were selected as variable modifications. The data was also searched against decoy database. Peptides with scores higher than 20 were considered reliably identified, which corresponded to FDR of around than 5%. Isobaric mass tagging quantitation was performed in Msnbase.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the increasing popularity of data-independent acquisition workflows, data-dependent acquisition (DDA) is still the prevalent method of LC-MS-based proteomics. DDA is the basis of isobaric mass tagging technique, a powerful MS2 quantification strategy that allows coanalysis of up to 10 proteomics samples. A well-documented limitation of DDA, however, is precursor coselection, whereby a target peptide is coisolated with other ions for fragmentation. Here, we investigated if additional peptide purification by traveling wave ion mobility separation (TWIMS) can reduce precursor contamination using a mixture of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and HeLa proteomes. In accordance with previous reports on FAIMS-Orbitrap instruments, we find that TWIMS provides a remarkable improvement (on average 2.85 times) in the signal-to-noise ratio for sequence ions. We also report that TWIMS reduces reporter ions contamination by around one-third (to 14-15% contamination) and even further (to 6-9%) when combined with a narrowed quadrupole isolation window. We discuss challenges associated with applying TWIMS purification to isobaric mass tagging experiments, including correlation between ion m/z and drift time, which means that coselected peptides are expected to have similar mobility. We also demonstrate that labeling results in peptides having more uniform m/z and drift time distributions than observed for unlabeled peptides. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001047.

### Keywords
Travelling wave ion mobility separation, Isobaric mass tag, Tandem mass tag, Ion mobility separation, Tmt, Twims, Ims

### Affiliations
Cambridge Center For Proteomics
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Pavel Shliaha

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Susan Lilley
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK


