### Accession
PXD030057

### Title
A positive feedback loop mediates crosstalk between calcium, cyclic nucleotide and lipid signaling in Toxoplasma gondii.

### Description
Fundamental processes of obligate intracellular parasites, such as Plasmodium falciparum and Toxoplasma gondii are controlled by a set of plant-like calcium dependent kinases (CDPKs), the conserved cAMP- and cGMP-dependent protein kinases (PKA and PKG), second messengers and lipid signalling. While some major components of the signalling networks have been identified, how these are connected is largely not known. Here, we compare the phospho-signalling networks during Toxoplasma egress from its host cell by artificially raising cGMP or calcium levels to activate PKG or CDPKs, respectively. We show that both these inducers trigger near identical signalling pathways and provide evidence for a feedback loop involving CDPK3. We measure phospho- and lipid signalling in parasites treated with the Ca2+ ionophore A23187 in a sub-minute timecourse and show CDPK3-dependent regulation of diacylglycerol levels and increased phosphorylation of four phosphodiesterases (PDEs), suggesting their function in the feedback loop. Disruption of CDPK3 leads to elevated cAMP levels and inhibition of PKA signalling rescues the egress defect of ΔCDPK3 parasites treated with A23187. Biochemical analysis of the four PDEs identifies PDE2 as the only cAMP-specific PDE among these candidates while the other PDEs are cGMP specific; two of which are inhibited by the predicted PDE inhibitor BIPPO. Conditional deletion of the 4 PDEs supports an important, but non-essential role of PDE1 and PDE2 for growth, while only the latter plays a role in controlling A23187-mediated egress. In summary, we uncover a positive feedback loop that potentiates signalling during egress and links several signalling pathways together.

### Sample Protocol
The phosphoproteomics data presented are from 2 isobaric labelling experiments (see the attached Sample legend). Parasites were seeded onto HFF monolayers in 15 cm culture dishes at an MOI of 5. 24 hours post-inoculation, plates were washed once with PBS and treated with 50 µM BIPPO (15 seconds) or 8 µM ionophore A23187 (variable timings depending on experiment) in Ringer’s buffer. Following the appropriate treatment duration, treatments were rapidly removed and plates placed on a super cooled salt ice bath to inhibit further signalling. Lysis was performed by scraping cells in ice cold 8 M Urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, supplemented with protease (complete mini, Roche) and phosphatase (Phos Stop, Roche) inhibitors. Lysis was followed by sonication to reduce sample viscosity (30% duty cycle, 3 x 30 seconds bursts, on ice). Protein concentration was measured using a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce). Lysates (1mg each) were subsequently reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56 ⁰C and alkylated in the dark with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at RT. Following iodoacetamide quenching with 5 mM DTT for 15 minutes in the dark, lysates were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to < 4M urea, and digested with LysC (Promega) for 2-3 hours at 37 ⁰C. Lysates were further diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to < 2M urea and digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 ⁰C. After acidification the samples were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 (Waters) and the eluted peptides dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES and labelled using a Tandem Mass Tag 10-plex isobaric reagent kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After verifying labelling efficiency, the samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio, vacuum dried and desalted on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 beads (Titansphere, 5 µm GL Sciences Japan) and the supernatant from the TiO2 enrichment was desalted on Sep-Pak C18 prior to a second round of enrichment using the High Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Combined TiO2 and Fe-NTA phosphopeptide eluates (phosphoproteome) were fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis using a U3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Each peptide fraction was pre-concentrated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column before separation on a 50 cm, 75μm I.D. EASY-Spray PepMap column over a 3-hour gradient. The instrument was run in data dependent acquisition mode with the most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation that was based on the MS2 HCD and MSA SPS MS3 strategies (Jiang et al. 2017).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw mass spectrometric data was processed with MaxQuant (Cox & Mann 2008) (version 1.5.2.8) and peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Toxoplasma gondii (ToxoDB) and Homo sapiens (UniProt) proteomes using Andromeda (Cox  et al. 2011) search engine. TMT based experiments in MaxQuant were performed using the ‘reporter ion MS2 or MS3’ built-in quantification algorithm with reporter mass tolerance set to 0.003 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-terminus and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) were selected as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for mass re-calibration) and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. ‘Match between runs’ option was enabled (time window 0.7 min) for fractionated samples. The datasets were filtered on posterior error probability (PEP) to achieve a 1% false discovery rate on protein, peptide and site level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Cdpk3, Egress, Calcium-signalling

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute Signalling in Apicomplexan Parasites Laboratory London NW1 1AT United Kingdom

### Submitter
Malgorzata Broncel

### Lab Head
Dr Moritz Treeck
The Francis Crick Institute Signalling in Apicomplexan Parasites Laboratory London NW1 1AT United Kingdom


