### Accession
PXD030422

### Title
Inflammatory fibroblasts mediate resistance to neoadjuvant therapy in rectal cancer

### Description
Standard cancer therapy targets tumor cells without considering the possible collateral damage on the tumor microenvironment that could impair therapy response. Employing patient-derived tumor organoids and primary stroma cells or a novel murine rectal cancer model, we show that interleukin-1a (IL-1a) dependent inflammatory cancer-associated fibroblast (iCAF) polarization triggers oxidative DNA damage in iCAFs leading to p53-mediated therapy-induced senescence associated with changes in matrisome composition, chemoradiotherapy resistance and disease progression. IL-1 inhibition, prevention of iCAF senescence or senolytic therapy sensitizes mice to irradiation. In rectal cancer patients a dominant iCAF gene signature as well as lower IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) serum levels correlate with poor prognosis. Moreover, conditioned supernatant from patient tumor organoids renders fibroblasts susceptible to radiation-induced senescence in an IL-1-dependent manner. Collectively, we unravel a critical role for iCAFs in therapy resistance and identify IL-1 signaling as an attractive target for stroma-repolarization and prevention of CAF senescence.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue sections of 5 – 10 µm of the FFPE samples were mounted on film covered membrane slides, dried at 37 °C for 1 hour, deparaffinized and rehydrated by successive incubation in xylene, absolute ethanol, 70% ethanol and water, each for 1 min and then stained with hematoxylin for 20 sec and rinsed with tap water. The pure rectal cancer tumor cell population was collected using the MMI cell cut plus laser capture microdissection system according to manufacturer’s instructions. Afterwards, the samples were suspended in lysis buffer containing 100 mM ABC, pH 8.0, 4% SDS, 0.2% DCA and 50 mM TCEP, incubated for 60 min at 99 °C and centrifuged for 15 min at 20,000g at room temperature. The SILAC quantification standard was composed of the cell lines LS411N, HT29, SW480, SW837 and SW1463. All cell lines were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and were metabolically labelled in RPMI-medium supplemented with 13C6,15N4-Arginine (Arg+10) and 13C6,15N2-Lysine (Lys+8) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), 10% dialysed serum and antibiotics for more than 8 cell cycles. For cell lysis, cells were washed with PBS and lysed with the lysis buffer described above, incubated at 90 °C for 15 min and sonicated for 3 minutes. Protein concentrations of the lysates were determined with the 660 nm and IDCR Kit (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Equal protein amounts of each tissue lysate and SILAC quantification standard were mixed with 200 µl of 8 M urea and 0.2% deoxycholic acid (DCA) in 100 mM ABC, pH 8.0 and loaded onto a 30 kDa microcon filter (Millipore). The filter was washed four times with the same buffer for 10 min at 14,000g at room temperature. Then, protein samples were alkylated with 50 mM IAA in 100 mM ABC, pH 8.0, for 60 min and washed times with 0.2% DCA in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), pH 8.0, by centrifugation for 10 min at 14,000g at room temperature. Samples were digested overnight at 37 °C with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) and peptides were collected with 50 mM ABC, pH 8.0. The resulting peptide- solution was mixed with 200 μl ethyl acetate and 2.5 µl TFA. Further 200 µl of ethyl acetate were added, samples were sonicated for 10 seconds and then centrifuged at 16,000g for 10 minutes at room temperature and the upper organic layer was removed. Samples were vacuum-dried and washed three times with 50% methanol. Afterwards the peptides were desalted with ZipTips (Merck Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and again vacuum-dried. The peptides were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). First, the peptides were desalted on a reverse-phase C18 pre-column (Dionex 5 mm long, 0.3 mm inner diameter) for 3 minutes. Subsequently, the pre column was switched online with the analytical column (27 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter); packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 μm reversed-phase resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water. The peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5% to 42% buffer B over buffer A at a flow rate of 300 nL/min in 178 min. The temperature of the pre-column and the column was set to 50 °C during the chromatography. MS data were acquired in data-dependent Top speed mode, where precursors within the range of m/z 350–1500 and charge states of 2–6 were selected from a survey MS1 scan for fragmentation with an isolation window of m/z 1.6 and a maximum cycle time of 3 seconds. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 and an AGC target value of 4E5 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Selected precursors underwent HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35. MS2 scans were acquired in the ion trap in rapid-scan mode with a maximum ion injection time of 250 ms and an AGC target value of 3E3. Selected precursor ions were excluded from fragmentation for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS data was processed with the MaxQuant software (MPI for Biochemistry, version 1.5.2.8). The spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human protein database (downloaded in January 2014) supplemented with 245 frequently observed contaminants using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 6 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, after initial recalibration. Protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both the peptide and the protein level by using a forward-and-reverse concatenated decoy database approach. For SILAC quantification, multiplicity was set to two for double SILAC (Lys+0/Arg+0, Lys+8/Arg+10) labelling. At least two ratio counts were required for peptide quantification. The “match between runs” option of MaxQuant was disabled and the “re-quantify” option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Standard cancer therapy targets tumor cells without considering possible damage on the tumor microenvironment that could impair therapy response. In rectal cancer patients we find that inflammatory cancer-associated fibroblasts (iCAFs) are associated with poor chemoradiotherapy response. Employing a murine rectal cancer model or patient-derived tumor organoids and primary stroma cells, we show that, upon irradiation, interleukin-1&#x3b1; (IL-1&#x3b1;) not only polarizes cancer-associated fibroblasts toward the inflammatory phenotype but also triggers oxidative DNA damage, thereby predisposing iCAFs to p53-mediated therapy-induced senescence, which in turn results in chemoradiotherapy resistance and disease progression. Consistently, IL-1 inhibition, prevention of iCAFs senescence, or senolytic therapy sensitizes mice to irradiation, while lower IL-1 receptor antagonist serum levels in rectal patients correlate with poor prognosis. Collectively, we unravel a critical role for iCAFs in rectal cancer therapy resistance and identify IL-1 signaling as an attractive target for stroma-repolarization and prevention of cancer-associated fibroblasts senescence.

### Keywords
Super-silac, Ffpe, Rectal cancer, Chemoradiotherapy

### Affiliations
Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy Georg-Speyer-Haus 60596 Frankfurt/Main Germany
Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy, Georg-Speyer-Haus, 60596 Frankfurt/Main, Germany
Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany


### Submitter
Adele Nicolas

### Lab Head
Dr Florian R. Greten
Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy Georg-Speyer-Haus 60596 Frankfurt/Main Germany


