### Accession
PXD030610

### Title
Climate sensitivity of Equatorial Pacific nutrient limitation

### Description
Projected responses of ocean net primary productivity (NPP) to climate change are highly uncertain. The climate sensitivity of phytoplankton nutrient limitation in the low-latitude Pacific plays a crucial role, but field measurements are insufficient to provide suitable constraints. Here we quantify two decades of nutrient limitation in the Equatorial Pacific with satellite observations. Using field nutrient addition experiments, proteomics, and above-water hyperspectral radiometry, we demonstrate that physiological responses of phytoplankton to iron limitation led to ~3-fold increases in chlorophyll-normalized phytoplankton fluorescence. Extension to the >18-year satellite fluorescence record showed that Equatorial Pacific iron limitation was robust to changes in physical forcing through multiple El Niño–Southern Oscillation cycles, despite coherent fluctuations in limitation strength. In contrast, these iron limitation changes were overestimated 2-fold by a state-of-the-art climate model. Such synoptic constraints provide a powerful new approach for benchmarking the realism of model NPP projections to climate changes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction: Proteins were extracted using a modified magnetic bead method from Ref. 61. Filter sections were placed in 15 mL of protein extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 1% SDS in HPLC grade water). Samples were heated at 95˚C for 10 minutes and shaken at room temperature for 30 minutes. Filters were removed and protein extracts were filtered through 5.0 µm Millex low protein binding filters. Samples were then centrifuged; supernatant was removed from the pellet and 6-7.5 mL of each sample was transferred to a Vivaspin 5K MWCO ultrafiltration unit. Protein extract was concentrated to approximately 350 µL, washed with 1 mL of lysis buffer and transferred to a 2 mL ETOH washed microtube. Vivaspins were rinsed with small volumes of protein extraction buffer to remove all concentrated protein and all samples were brought up to 430 µL with extraction buffer. 30 µL was set aside for total protein quantification and DNA analysis.   Protein reduction and alkylation: 50 units (2 µL) of benzonase nuclease (Novagen) was added to each sample and incubated at 37˚C for 30 minutes. Samples were reduced by adding 20 µL of 200 mM DTT (Fisher Scientific) in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 at 45˚C for 30 minutes. Samples were alkylated by adding 40 µL of 400 mM iodoacetamide (Acros) in HEPES pH 8.5 for 30 minutes at 24˚C, occasionally heating to 37˚C to prevent precipitation. The reaction was quenched by adding 40 µL of 200 mM DTT in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5.  Protein purification and digestion: SpeedBead Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (GE Healthcare) were prepared according to Ref. 61. 20 µL (20 µg/µL) of magnetic beads were added to 400 µL of extracted protein sample. Samples were heated at 37˚C periodically to avoid precipitation. Samples were acidified to pH 2–3 by adding 50 µL of 10% formic acid. Twice the volume (1100 µL) of acetonitrile was immediately added. Samples were incubated at 37˚C for 15 minutes and then at room temperature for 30 minutes. Samples were placed on a magnetic rack, incubated for 2 minutes, supernatant was removed and discarded. Samples were washed 2 times removing and discarding supernatants with 1400 µL of 70% ETOH for 30 seconds on the magnetic rack. 1400 µL of acetonitrile was added to each sample for 30 seconds on the magnetic rack. Supernatant was removed and discarded. Samples air dried for approximately 4 minutes until acetonitrile had just evaporated. Samples were removed from the magnetic rack and beads were reconstituted in 90 µL of 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0. Purified protein was quantified as described above. Trypsin (Promega) dissolved in HEPES pH 8.0 at a concentration of 0.5 µg/µL was added to samples at a 1:25 trypsin to protein ratio and incubated at 37˚C overnight.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra files were searched using SEQUEST HT within Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software using a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.6 Da and allowing up to 1 missed cleavage site. Oxidation and acetyl dynamic modifications and carbamidomethyl static modifications were included. Percolator peptide spectral matching was used within Proteome Discoverer with a maximum Delta Cn of 0.05 and a decoy search validation based on posterior error probabilities (PEP). Processed files were then loaded into Scaffold 5.0 (Proteome Software Inc.) using prefiltered mode with a protein threshold of 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR), a peptide threshold of 0.1% FDR, and a minimum of 1 peptide for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prochlorococcus, Chlorophyl, Metaproteomics, Phytoplankton, Iron limitation, Ocean

### Affiliations
Marine Chemistry Geochemistry Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Woods Hole, MA 02543 US
Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst.

### Submitter
Matthew McIlvin

### Lab Head
Dr Mak Saito
Marine Chemistry Geochemistry Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Woods Hole, MA 02543 US


