### Accession
PXD000768

### Title
Colon cancer stem cell over-expressing TAp63α

### Description
p63, a member of p53 family, is transcribed in different variants, containing (TA) or lacking (N) the N-terminal transactivation domain. Although the proteins of p53 family share high sequence and structural similarities, distinct functions for p63 are emerging. Here we provided a quantitative proteomic analysis by stable isotope dimethyl labeling of colon cancer stem cells over-expressing TAp63α in order to investigate the cellular pathways modulated by this p63 isoform.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from control cells and cells over-expressing Np63α were digested by standard protocols and Tryptic peptides were subjected to chemical labeling. 1.5μl of formaldehyde-D0 (20% in water) were mixed to the peptides mixture, vortexed and incubated for 5min at RT. Then 2.5μl of freshly prepared sodium cyanoborohydride (1M) were added and allowed to react for 1h at RT. Deuterium labeling was performed by similar procedure, but by using formaldehyde-D2 (20% in water). Light and heavy labeled samples were mixed 1:1 prior peptides separation by isoelectric focusing. We analyzed TAp63- D0 with CTRL- D2 (1:1) and the inverted labeled samples TAp63- D2 with CTRL- D0 (1:1). Immobilized pH Gradient Isoelectric Focusing (IPG-IEF) was used for separation of labeled peptides. Focused strip were cut in 17 pieces and peptides were extracted. Five microliters of each sample were separated by a Proxeon Easy-nLC II (Thermo Scientific,Waltham, MA) chromatographic system equipped with an EASY-Column C18. 5 μm, 100 μm×20mm precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and using an Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 75 μm×25mm(Dionex, Thermo Scientific) nanoscale LC column. Mobile phase A was water with 0.1% FA and mobile phase B was 0.1% FA in acetonitrile. Peptides were separated with a reverse phase gradient of 5–35% mobile phase B over 57 min at flow rate of 300 nl/min, a rinse with 100% mobile phase B for 10 min. The chromatographic system was coupled online with a MicrOTOF Q-II mass spectrometer (Bruker-Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), equipped with an ESI nano Sprayer ion source. Spectra acquisition in the mass range 400-1400m/z, was performed by using an Auto (MS/MS) mode method optimized for quantitative proteomics (Bruker-Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), with number of precursor ions set to 5, MS spectra rate of 1.0 Hz, using Argon in collision gas cell, and the SILE option selected, applying a delta mass of 4.0251m/z fixed for peptides pairs in the SILE option.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed in Multifiles Projects by using Mascot Distiller v2.4.3.3, applying the default processing methods optimized for Q-TOF instrument. Peptide identification was achieved by in house version of Mascot algorithm (version 2.4), interrogating Swiss-Prot database (released version 2013_02) restricted to Homo sapiens taxonomy (20248 sequences). Search parameters were: carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, oxidation of methionines as variable modification, Dimethylation as Quantitation method, one missing cleavage allowed on tryptic peptides, 20ppm for peptide tolerance, 0.1Da for fragment tolerance, p-value< 0.05 for peptide significant value of identification, Decoy option active. Proteins identified with one unique peptide were manually validated. After protein identification only peptides matching the following criteria were included in the final Quantitation analysis: p-value< 0.05 for peptide significant value, bold red, unique sequences, standard error less than 0.2, correlation threshold above 0.9, fraction threshold al least of 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
p63 is an important regulator of epithelial development expressed in different variants containing (TA) or lacking (&#x394;N) the N-terminal transactivation domain. The different isoforms regulate stem-cell renewal and differentiation as well as cell senescence. Several studies indicate that p63 isoforms also play a role in cancer development; however, very little is known about the role played by p63 in regulating the cancer stem phenotype. Here we investigate the cellular signals regulated by TAp63 and &#x394;Np63 in a model of epithelial cancer stem cells. To this end, we used colon cancer stem cells, overexpressing either TAp63 or &#x394;Np63 isoforms, to carry out a proteomic study by chemical-labeling approach coupled to network analysis. Our results indicate that p63 is implicated in a wide range of biological processes, including metabolism. This was further investigated by a targeted strategy at both protein and metabolite levels. The overall data show that TAp63 overexpressing cells are more glycolytic-active than &#x394;Np63 cells, indicating that the two isoforms may regulate the key steps of glycolysis in an opposite manner. The mass-spectrometry proteomics data of the study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium ( http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org ) via the PRIDE partner repository with data set identifiers PXD000769 and PXD000768.

### Keywords
Stable isotope dimethyl labeling, Lc-msms, Colon cancer stem cells, P63

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy
Experimental Chemotherapy Laboratory
Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy

### Submitter
Simona D'Aguanno

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Andrea Urbani
Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy


