### Accession
PXD009924

### Title
Influenza A virus induced proteome changes

### Description
Seasonal epidemics of influenza A virus in the human population are a major cause of severe illness and are of high socio-economic relevance. For the design of effective anti-viral therapies, a detailed knowledge of cellular pathways perturbed by virus infection is critical. We performed comprehensive expression and organellar proteomics experiments using A549, Calu-1 and NCI-H1299 cells to identify new protein targets and cellular pathways affected by influenza A virus.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeled cells were infected by infleunza A virus and compared to non-infected control cells. Nuclei, mitochondria, cytosol and vesicles were fractionated by step centrifugation, respective fractions combined and separated by SDS-PAGE. Proteins were in-gel digested and peptides analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Protein abundance changes as well as changes in subcellular localization were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Data was uploaded into MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 and searched against a human UNIPROT database also containing influenza A peotein entries.

### Publication Abstract
Seasonal epidemics of influenza A virus are a major cause of severe illness and are of high socio-economic relevance. For the design of effective antiviral therapies, a detailed knowledge of pathways perturbed by virus infection is critical. We performed comprehensive expression and organellar proteomics experiments to study the cellular consequences of influenza A virus infection using three human epithelial cell lines derived from human lung carcinomas: A549, Calu-1 and NCI-H1299. As a common response, the type I interferon pathway was up-regulated upon infection. Interestingly, influenza A virus infection led to numerous cell line-specific responses affecting both protein abundance as well as subcellular localization. In A549 cells, the vesicular compartment appeared expanded after virus infection. The composition of autophagsomes was altered by targeting of ribosomes, viral mRNA and proteins to these double membrane vesicles. Thus, autophagy may support viral protein translation by promoting the clustering of the respective molecular machinery in autophagosomes in a cell line-dependent manner.

### Keywords
Human, Expression proteomics, Influenza, Organelle, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                 E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch F  +41 26 300 9741
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                 E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch F  +41 26 300 9741


