### Accession
PXD015985

### Title
Non-competitive binding of PpiD and YidC to the SecYEG translocon expands the global view on the SecYEG interactome in E. coli

### Description
The SecYEG translocon constitutes the major protein transport channel in bacteria and transfers an enormous variety of different secretory and inner-membrane proteins. The minimal core of the SecYEG translocon consists of three inner-membrane proteins, SecY, SecE, and SecG, which, together with appropriate targeting factors, are sufficient for protein transport in vitro. However, in vivo the SecYEG translocon has been shown to associate with multiple partner proteins, likely allowing the SecYEG translocon to process its diverse substrates. To obtain a global view on SecYEG plasticity in Escherichia coli, here we performed a quantitative interaction proteomic analysis, which identified several known SecYEG-interacting proteins, verified the interaction of SecYEG with quality-control proteins, and revealed several previously unknown putative SecYEG interacting proteins. Surprisingly, we found that the chaperone complex PpiD/YfgM is the most prominent interaction partner of SecYEG. Detailed analyses of the PpiD–SecY interaction by site-directed cross-linking revealed that PpiD and the established SecY partner protein YidC use almost completely overlapping binding sites on SecY. Both PpiD and YidC contacted the lateral gate, the plug domain, and the periplasmic cavity of SecY. However, quantitative MS and cross-linking analyses revealed that despite having almost identical binding sites, their binding to SecY is non-competitive. This observation suggests that the SecYEG translocon forms different substrate-independent subassemblies in which SecYEG either associates with YidC or with the PpiD/YfgM complex. In summary, the results of this study indicate that the PpiD/YfgM chaperone complex is a primary interaction partner of the SecYEG translocon.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli BL21 cells carrying plasmid pEVol and plasmid pTrc99a-SecYHisEG or pTRc99aSecYHisEG-YidC were cultured overnight at 37 °C in LB medium containing 50 µg/ml ampicillin and 30 µg/ml chloramphenicol. 10 ml of the overnight culture was further used for inoculation in 1l minimal medium  (1% w/v glycerol, 47.7 mM Na2HPO4, 22 mM KH2PO4, 8.6 mM NaCl, 18.7 mM NH4Cl, 0.153 mM CaCl2, 0.59 mM MgSO4, 2.07 µM Na2MoO4, 4.198 µM CoSO4, 37.49 µM  MnSO4, 4.35 µM  ZnSO4, 6.29 µM  FeCl2, 16.17 µM H3BO3, 40 mg/l L-leucine, 1 mg/ml D-biotin, 1 mg/ml thiamine,  7 mg/l chloramphenicol, 10 mg/l ampicillin)  until cells reached the early exponential growth phase (OD600=0.5-0.8) and protein expression was then induced with 0.5 mM IPTG. After induction, the cultures were grown for 4 hours at 30°C, were cooled down on ice for 10 minutes and harvested by centrifugation at 3738 x g in a JLA 9.1000 rotor for 10 minutes. Each cell pellet was resuspended in 10 ml resuspension buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2) to which 0.5 mM PMSF and 2 pills/l cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche®; Mannheim Germany) were added. Next, the samples were lysed by French pressing and cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 30000 x g for 30 minutes in an SS34 rotor. The supernatant was further centrifuged 244,061 x g for 1.5 hours in a TLA 50.2 rotor for membrane sedimentation. Next, the membrane pellets were solubilized in solubilisation buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 % glycerol, 1 % DDM) for 1 hour at 4°C. Non-solubilized membranes were separated by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 18,407 x g in an Eppendorf FA-45-24-11 rotor at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred onto TALON® Metal affinity resin, which was then washed twice with washing buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 % glycerol, 0.03 % DDM, 5 mM imidazole) and subsequently washed four times with imidazole-free washing buffer. Further, the material was washed four times with imidazole-containing washing buffer and eluted in 2 ml elution buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 % glycerol, 0.03 % DDM, 200 mM imidazole).   The chemical cross-linker disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS, ThermoFisher Scientific, Langenselbold, Germany) was dissolved in DMSO and incubated with the samples for 30 minutes at 25 °C after the second-imidazole-free washing step (on-column cross-linking) or after the elution step (solution cross-linking). A 100 mM DSS stock solution was freshly prepared, from which either 50 μl were added to a total of 5 mL or 20 μl to a total of 2 mL. The final DSS concentration was 1 mM.  After the DSS incubation step, the reaction was quenched by adding Tris/HCl, pH 7.5 from a 1M Tris/HCl stock solution to a final concentration of 20 mM.  Protein samples for MS analyses were precipitated with acetone at -20 °C over-night and subsequently centrifuged with 18,407 x g in an Eppendorf FA-45-24-11 rotor at 4 °C for 20 min. After the supernatant was removed, the protein samples were dried and denatured in 10 µl 8 M urea (in 50 mM NH4HCO3). Then, 1.1µl 50 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (in 50mM NH4HCO3) was added and the sample was incubated for 20 minutes at 37 °C with continuous shaking at 600 rpm. Subsequently, 1.23 µl 500 mM iodoacetamide (in 50 mM NH4HCO3) was added and incubated for 20 minutes in the absence of light. Finally, 3µl of 100 mM dithiothreitol (in 50 mM NH4HCO3) and subsequently 25 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 were added. The protein samples were digested overnight with 0.125 µg/µl trypsin at 37 °C, and then acidified with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and centrifuged for 6 minutes at 13,523 x g in an FA-45-24-11 rotor.  Peptide mixtures were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano coupled to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. A 155-min linear gradient ranging from 5 to 50% solvent B [50% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 30% (vol/vol) methanol, 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid; solvent A: 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid] and a subsequent increase to 95% B within 5 min was used for LC separation. MS measurements were performed recording MS1 scans from m/z 375–1700 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3 × 10^6 ions and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. MS2 scans for up to 12 of the most intense multiply charged precursor ions above an intensity threshold of 5,000 were acquired at a resolution of 35,000. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 45 s. For fragmentation, higher-energy collisional dissociation was used with an AGC of 1 × 10^6 ions, a maximum fill time of 120 ms, and a normalized collision energy of 28.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 searching against the UniProt E. coli proteome set sequence database (version 2018_08, 4344 entries) allowing a maximum of three missed cleavages of trypsin, a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Methionine oxidation and hydrolysed DSS at lysines was specified as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. The lists of both peptide and protein identifications were filtered applying a threshold for the false discovery rate of <0.01. Only proteins detected in at least two biological replicates, identified with ≥ 20% sequence coverage and a minimum of two peptides were considered as reliably identified. The LFQ algorithm was used for label-free relative quantification with a minimum ratio count of 1. Intensity ratios (SecYHisEG versus SecYEG) were computed and, when needed because one value of a ratio pair was zero, missing values were replaced using data imputation to simulate signals of low abundant proteins near the detection limit of the instrument. Missing values were based on the mean and standard deviation of the distribution of all logarithmic intensities using a downshift of 2.1 and a width adjustment of 0.2. To determine significant interactors, logarithmic ratios were normalized for each replicate and subjected to two-sided t-tests across all replicates. Threshold values for p-value and ratio in volcano plots were defined using symmetric hyperbolic curves separating false positive identifications on the left side (ratios < 1) and a set of significant interactors on the right side (ratios >1). Final parameters used to ensure a false positive rate <0.01 were a bend of 0.25, p-value threshold of 0.05 and log10 ratio limit of 10.

### Publication Abstract
The SecYEG translocon constitutes the major protein transport channel in bacteria and transfers an enormous variety of different secretory and inner-membrane proteins. The minimal core of the SecYEG translocon consists of three inner-membrane proteins, SecY, SecE, and SecG, which, together with appropriate targeting factors, are sufficient for protein transport <i>in vitro</i> However, <i>in vivo</i> the SecYEG translocon has been shown to associate with multiple partner proteins, likely allowing the SecYEG translocon to process its diverse substrates. To obtain a global view on SecYEG plasticity in <i>Escherichia coli</i>, here we performed a quantitative interaction proteomic analysis, which identified several known SecYEG-interacting proteins, verified the interaction of SecYEG with quality-control proteins, and revealed several previously unknown putative SecYEG-interacting proteins. Surprisingly, we found that the chaperone complex PpiD/YfgM is the most prominent interaction partner of SecYEG. Detailed analyses of the PpiD-SecY interaction by site-directed cross-linking revealed that PpiD and the established SecY partner protein YidC use almost completely-overlapping binding sites on SecY. Both PpiD and YidC contacted the lateral gate, the plug domain, and the periplasmic cavity of SecY. However, quantitative MS and cross-linking analyses revealed that despite having almost identical binding sites, their binding to SecY is noncompetitive. This observation suggests that the SecYEG translocon forms different substrate-independent subassemblies in which SecYEG either associates with YidC or with the PpiD/YfgM complex. In summary, the results of this study indicate that the PpiD/YfgM chaperone complex is a primary interaction partner of the SecYEG translocon.

### Keywords
Protein translocation, Protein-protein interaction, Interaction proteomics, Yidc, Ppid, Secyeg translocon, Protein cross-linking, Quantitative affinity purification mass spectrometry (qap-ms)

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany


