### Accession
PXD028636

### Title
2'-O-methylation of the second transcribed nucleotide in eukaryotic RNA 5’ cap impacts protein production levels and susceptibility to DXO-mediated transcript degradation

### Description
Eukaryotic mRNA 5’ end is decorated with cap structure which plays multiple roles in the cell. Most importantly, protects transcript from exonucleolytic degradation and enables translation of encoded protein conducted by cap-dependent machinery. This is also a key feature in the process of recognizing RNA as self or non-self molecule by cellular innate immune system. Cap is composed of 7-methylguanosine linked by a 5′,5′-triphosphate chain to the first transcribed nucleotide, and is formed enzymatically during transcription. This m7GpppN structure, called cap0, can be further modified by CMTR1 methyltransferase to cap1 (m7GpppNm), which predominates in eukaryotic cells. Cap2, with additional 2′-O-methylation at the second transcribed nucleotide (m7GpppNmpNm) added by another methyltransferase CMTR2, also can be found at mRNA 5’ end. We present new tools allowing for in vitro synthesis of RNAs possessing cap2, i.e tetranucleotide cap analogues. Utilizing these for in vitro transcription reactions we obtained RNAs with 2′-O-methylation present at the second transcribed nucleotide. Due to that we investigated the role of cap2 in protein production from reporter mRNA protected with this structure in different conditions, normal or stress ones, or with CMTR1/2 down regulated level. We also assessed the affinity of eIF4E protein to differentially capped RNAs. Furthermore, we verified whether an additional 2′-O-methylation presence in capped RNA makes transcript more resistant to decapping enzyme action.

### Sample Protocol
To each sample 20ul of 100mM NH4HCO3 and 2.5ul of 200mM TCEP were added, vortex, and placed at horizontal shaker (1000rpm)  in RT for 30 minutes. Consequently, 2ul of MMTS were added and were shaken for 20 minutes at RT. Trypsin/LysC (Promega) was solved in 8M Urea in 100mM NH4HCO3, to final enzyme concentration 0.02ug/ul, 50ul was added to each sample, incubated with shaking at 37C for 4h, then 300ul of NH4HCO3 was added and digested ON. Samples were acidifed with 10ul of 5% TFA. The resulting peptide mixture was purified at Oasis HLB 10mg sorbent (Waters) 96-well plates, vacuum-dried, and suspended in 60ul of 2% MeCN, 0.1%TFA. Samples prepared in this way were measured in an online LC-MS setup of EvosepOne (Evosep Biosystems) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Thermo Fisher Scientific mass spectrometer.  Peptides mixture were loaded on Evotips C18 trap columns, according to the vendor protocol: activation of sorbent with 0.1% FA in MeCN, 2-minute incubation in 1-propanol, chromatographic sorbent equilibration with 0.1% FA in water, samples were loaded in 30ul of 0.1% FA, after each step, EvoTips were centrifuged at 600 x g for one minute. Chromatographic separation was carried out at a flow rate of 500 nL/min using the 44 min (30 samples per day) performed gradient on an EV1106 analytical column (Dr. Maisch C18 AQ, 1.9 µm beads, 150 µm ID, 15 cm long, Evosep Biosystems, Odense, Denmark). Data were acquired in positive mode with a data-dependent method using the following parameters. The MS1 resolution was set to 60,000 with a normalized AGC target of 300%, auto maximum inject time and a scan range of 350 to 1400 m/z. For MS2, the resolution was set to 15,000 with a standard normalized AGC target, auto maximum inject time, and top 40 precursors within an isolation window of 1.6 m/z considered for MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set at 20 s with an allowed mass tolerance of ±10 ppm, with a precursor intensity threshold of 5 × 103. Precursors were fragmented in HCD mode with a normalized collision energy of 30%. The spray voltage was set to 2.1 kV, with a funnel RF level of 40 and heated capillary temperature of 275 °C

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant (versions 1.6.0.4 and 2.0.2.0 platform) and searched against Uniprot human (78120 entries) and mouse (55360 entries) reference proteomes. fixed modifications: methyltio (MMTS) at cysteines; variable: oxidation methionine, acetyl n-term. 20ppm error at MS and 0.1Da at MS/MS level, FDR 1%. Common contamination database were included.  Each group consist of 3 biological repetitions, average signal intensity was calculated for every condition. Data were analyzed in a way to indicate which proteins co-precipitate with the immobilized decoy in a repeatable and specific manner compared to the given control group. To obtain that “Specificity” (log10 (intensity in the sample/intensity in the control)) parameter was calculated. To normalize the signal to a size of protein we used the “Abundance” (log10(intensity in the sample/M.W.) factor.

### Publication Abstract
In mammals, m7G-adjacent nucleotides undergo extensive modifications. Ribose of the first or first and second transcribed nucleotides can be subjected to 2'-O-methylation to form cap1 or cap2, respectively. When the first transcribed nucleotide is 2'-O-methylated adenosine, it can be additionally modified to N6,2'-O-dimethyladenosine (m6Am). Recently, the crucial role of cap1 in distinguishing between 'self' and 'non-self' in mammalian cells during viral infection was revealed. Here, we attempted to understand the impact of cap methylations on RNA-related processes. Therefore, we synthesized tetranucleotide cap analogues and used them for RNA capping during in vitro transcription. Using this tool, we found that 2'-O-methylation of the second transcribed nucleotide within the mRNA 5' cap influences protein production levels in a cell-specific manner. This modification can strongly hamper protein biosynthesis or have no influence on protein production levels, depending on the cell line. Interestingly, 2'-O-methylation of the second transcribed nucleotide and the presence of m6Am as the first transcribed nucleotide serve as determinants that define transcripts as 'self' and contribute to transcript escape from the host innate immune response. Additionally, cap methylation status does not influence transcript affinity towards translation initiation factor eIF4E or in vitro susceptibility to decapping by DCP2; however, we observe the resistance of cap2-RNA to DXO (decapping exoribonuclease)-mediated decapping and degradation.

### Keywords
Cap, A549, Mrna

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Centre of New Technology University of Warsaw Banacha 2C 02-097 Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Paweł Sikorski
Centre of New Technology University of Warsaw Banacha 2C 02-097 Warsaw, Poland


