### Accession
PXD039328

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of non-invasive and invasive pituitary adenomas

### Description
We collected samples from patients with invasive and non-invasive pituitary adenomas from Beijing Tiantan Hospital for protein extraction and quantitative analysis, and identified invasive differential proteins (DEPs) by differential analysis of the two groups.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 19 tissue samples from patients with early-stage pituitary adenomas were lysed with UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), and sonicated on ice (180 W, 1 s on and 2 s off, 99 cycles). The lysate was centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 15 min. The supernatant was recovered and quantified using the Bradford method. The protein was digested by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) following the protocol described in references. Quantitative proteomic analysis The peptides for the DDA analysis were pre-fractionated by high-pH reversed-phase chromatography (Hp-RP). two hundred micrograms of peptides were loaded and separated with 45min gradient , pH 10.45 fractions were collected, combined 12 fractions, heat-dried and stored at -80°C after centrifugation. The LC-MS/MS detection system consisted of a nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC) instrument (Easy-nLC 1000 System; Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). A home-packing column (150-μm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm; Dr Maisch) with a length of 20-cm was used for peptide separation at 60°C. The flow rate was 600 nL/min over a 90-min gradient (0–8 min, 3–8% B; 8–68 min, 8–20% B; 68–83 min, 20–30% B; 83–84min, 30–90% B; 84–90 min, 90% B). The full MS scan range was 400–1200 Da. MS/MS was operated in top 20 mode. iRT (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) was added as an internal standard according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides from 293 cell digestion were used in all experiments. The LC-MS/MS system for the DIA analysis consisted of a nanoflow HPLC (Easy-nLC 1000 System; Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The flow rate was 600 nL/min over different gradients. The MS1 survey scan range was 400–1200 m/z, followed by 29 MS2 scans of overlapping sequential precursor isolation windows (20 m/z isolation width, 40 m/z isolation width, 50 m/z isolation width,1 m/z overlap). The accumulation time was set according to the experimental requirements. The chromatograph peak width was 18 s. iRT was added to ensure calibration on difficult matrices, allowing for detailed quality control.

### Data Protocol
All data were obtained on a 20-cm analytical column. DDA raw data files were searched against the human UniProt database ( 20190617 with sequences of iRT peptides) using MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) with default settings. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. The DDA data search results were imported into Spectronaut (version 14) with default settings. The FDR threshold was set to less than 0.01. The DIA raw data files were directly imported into Spectronaut with default settings, and the results for protein identification and quantitation were exported with protein and peptide FDRs of less than 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pituitary adenomas

### Affiliations
Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical University
Beijing Tiantan Hospital

### Submitter
Yu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Zhang
Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical University


