### Accession
PXD014840

### Title
Uncoupling of PARP1 Trapping and Inhibition Using Selective PARP1 Degradation

### Description
PARP1 inhibitors (PARPi) are known to kill tumor cells via two mechanisms (i.e., PARP1 catalytic inhibition vs. PARP1 trapping). The relative contribution of these two pathways in mediating the cytotoxicity of PARPi, however, is incompletely understood. Here we designed a series of small molecule PARP degraders. Treatment with one such compound iRucaparib (1) results in highly efficient and specific PARP1 degradation. iRucaparib blocks the enzymatic activity of PARP1 in vitro, and PARP1-mediated PARylation signaling in intact cells. This strategy mimics PARP1 genetic depletion, which enables the pharmacological decoupling of PARP1 inhibition from PARP1 trapping. Finally, by depleting PARP1, iRucaparib protects muscle cells and primary cardiomyocytes from DNA damage-induced energy crisis and cell death. In summary, these compounds represent “non-trapping” PARP1 degraders that block both the catalytic activity and scaffolding effects of PARP1, providing an ideal approach for the amelioration of the various pathological conditions caused by PARP1 hyperactivation.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labeled HeLa cells ([12C614N2]lysine and [12C614N4]arginine, “Light”, or [13C615N2]lysine and [13C615N4]arginine, “Heavy”) were pretreated with 2 uM of the PARG inhibitor44 PDD 00017273 for 1 hour, and then were left untreated (DMSO) or treated with 10 uM Rucaparib or iRucaparib for another hour. The cells were challenged with 2 mM H2O2 for 5 min, and were harvested in SDS lysis buffer. Protein concentrations were determined by the BCA assay kit. The same amounts of proteins (20 mg) were combined between the light and heavy samples. Lysates were reduced with DTT (3 mM for 20 min at RT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (50 mM for 30 min at RT in dark), and digested overnight with Lys-C and then trypsin (both at a 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio). PARylated peptides were enriched using m-Aminophenyl-boronic acid-agarose beads and were eluted using 2 M NH2OH.   Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a top 20 CID (Collision-induced dissociation) method. The isolation window and the minimal signal threshold for MS/MS experiments were set to be 2 Th and 500 counts, respectively.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a composite database of the human UniProt database (02-04-2014) and its reversed complement using the Sequest (Rev28) algorithm. Search parameters allowed for a static modification of 57.02146 Da on cysteine, a dynamic modification of addition of 15.0109 Da to aspartic acid and glutamic acid, a variable modiﬁcation of 15.994915 Da on methionine and a variable modification of 8.01420 Da on lysing and 10.00827 Da on arginine (SILAC label), respectively. Search results were filtered to include < 1% matches to the reverse database by the linear discriminator function.

### Publication Abstract
PARP1 inhibitors (PARPi) are known to kill tumor cells via two mechanisms (PARP1 catalytic inhibition and PARP1 trapping). The relative contribution of these two pathways in mediating the cytotoxicity of PARPi, however, is not well understood. Here we designed a series of small molecule PARP degraders. Treatment with one such compound iRucaparib-AP6 results in highly efficient and specific PARP1 degradation. iRucaparib-AP6 blocks the enzymatic activity of PARP1 in vitro, and PARP1-mediated poly-ADP-ribosylation signaling in intact cells. This strategy mimics PARP1 genetic depletion, which enables the pharmacological decoupling of PARP1 inhibition from PARP1 trapping. Finally, by depleting PARP1, iRucaparib-AP6 protects muscle cells and primary cardiomyocytes from DNA-damage-induced energy crisis and cell death. In summary, these compounds represent 'non-trapping' PARP1 degraders that block both the catalytic activity and scaffolding effects of PARP1, providing an ideal approach for the amelioration of the various pathological conditions caused by PARP1 hyperactivation.

### Keywords
Parylated proteome, Rucaparib, Irucaparib-tp3, Irucaparib, Hela cell

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
UT Southwestern Medical Center

### Submitter
Shuai Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yonghao Yu
Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.


