### Accession
PXD034818

### Title
LC-MSMS of primary breast cancer samples

### Description
CD8 T cells drive the anti-cancer immune response through the recognition of MHC I-associated peptides. In order to identify relevant targets for cancer immunotherapy in breast cancer, we characterized the immunopeptidome of 26 primary breast cancer samples from two different subtypes, hormone-receptor positive (n=14) and triple negative (n=12). We were able to identify tumor-specific and tumor associated antigens in both subtypes of breast cancer, which can be used for the development of anti-cancer vaccines or as targets for engineered T-cells.

### Sample Protocol
MAP   extracts   were   resuspended   in   200 mM   Hepes   buffer   pH   8.1.   50 g   of TMTzero reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in anhydrous acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to samples. Samples were gently vortexed and reacted at room temperature for 1.5 hours. Samples were then quenched with 50% hydroxylamine for 30 minutes at room temperature and diluted with 4%FA/H2O. Samples were then desalted on homemade C18 membrane (Empore) columns and stored at -20oC until injection.   Dried TMT labeled peptide extracts were resuspended in 4% formic acid and samples 1 to 24 were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC1000 coupled to a Tribrid Orbitrap Fusion   mass   spectrometer  (Thermo   Fisher   Scientific)   as   samples   25   and   26   were analyzed with a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo   Fisher   Scientific).     For samples 1 to 24, peptides were separated on a custom C18 reversed-phase column (150 μm i.d. × 200 mm, Jupiter Proteo 4 μm, 300 Å, Phenomenex) using a flow rate of 600 nL/min and a linear gradient of 5−40% ACN (0.2% FA) in 90 min, followed by 15 min at 70% ACN (0.2% FA) and 15 min reequilibration at 5% ACN (0.2% FA).  Survey scan (MS1) were acquired with the Orbitrap at a resolving power of 120 000 (at m/z 200) over a scan range of 300−1100 m/z with a target values of 5 × 10’5 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Only precursor ions with charge states 2−4 were considered for MS/MS sequencing. MS/MS spectra were acquired at higher energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 35, and an exclusion time of 30 s. Up to 20 precursor ions were accumulated with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, an advanced gain control (AGC) of 2 × 10’4 with a maximum injection time of 1000 ms and fragment ions were transferred to the Orbitrap analyzer operating at a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200. For samples 25-26, peptides were loaded on a  custom C18 reversed-phase column (150 μm i.d. × 150 mm, Jupiter Proteo 4 μm, 300 Å, Phenomenex) with a 106-minute gradient from  0%  to  30%  acetonitrile  (0.2%  formic  acid)   and  a  600  nL/min   flow   rate   on  an EasynLC II system. Q-Exactive HF was operated in positive ion mode with Nanospray 2 source at 1.6 kV. Each full MS spectrum, acquired with a 60,000 resolution was followed by 20 MS/MS spectra, where the most abundant multiply charged ions were selected for  MS/MS sequencing with a resolution of 30,000, an automatic gain control target of 2 x10’4, an injection time of 800 ms and collisional energy of 28.

### Data Protocol
All liquid chromatography MS/MS (LC-MS/MS) data were searched against the relevant database using PEAKS 10.5 or Peaks X Pro (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.). For peptide identification, tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. The occurrences of oxidation (M), deamidation and TMT modification were set as variable modifications

### Publication Abstract
Hormone receptor-positive breast cancer (HR+) is immunologically cold and has not benefited from advances in immunotherapy. In contrast, subsets of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) display high leukocytic infiltration and respond to checkpoint blockade. CD8+ T cells, the main effectors of anticancer responses, recognize MHC I-associated peptides (MAPs). Our work aimed to characterize the repertoire of MAPs presented by HR+ and TNBC tumors. Using mass spectrometry, we identified 57,094 unique MAPs in 26 primary breast cancer samples. MAP source genes highly overlapped between both subtypes. We identified 25 tumor-specific antigens (TSAs) mainly deriving from aberrantly expressed regions. TSAs were most frequently identified in TNBC samples and were more shared among The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database TNBC than HR+ samples. In the TNBC cohort, the predicted number of TSAs positively correlated with leukocytic infiltration and overall survival, supporting their immunogenicity in vivo. We detected 49 tumor-associated antigens (TAAs), some of which derived from cancer-associated fibroblasts. Functional expansion of specific T cell assays confirmed the in vitro immunogenicity of several TSAs and TAAs. Our study identified attractive targets for cancer immunotherapy in both breast cancer subtypes. The higher prevalence of TSAs in TNBC tumors provides a rationale for their responsiveness to checkpoint blockade.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mhc class i, Immunopeptidome, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
IRIC
All liquid chromatography MS/MS (LC-MS/MS) data were searched against the relevant database using PEAKS 10.5 or Peaks X Pro (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.). For peptide identification, tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. The occurrences of oxidation (M), deamidation and TMT modification were set as variable modifications

### Submitter
Courcelles Mathieu

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
All liquid chromatography MS/MS (LC-MS/MS) data were searched against the relevant database using PEAKS 10.5 or Peaks X Pro (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.). For peptide identification, tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. The occurrences of oxidation (M), deamidation and TMT modification were set as variable modifications


