### Accession
PXD022563

### Title
Identification of GFP-FIP200-interacting proteins

### Description
GFP or GFP-200 proteins were purified from the corresponding Flp-In™ T REx™ 293 cells using GFP-Trap beads. Purified proteins were analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
For MS analysis, gel pieces were reduced and alkylated followed by digestion with trypsin as described elsewhere. Peptides were extracted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and subjected to liquid chromatography. For peptide separation over a 130 min LC gradient, an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatography system (Dionex/Thermo Scientific, Idstein, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length, 2 µm particle size from Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used. MS analysis was carried out on an Obitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operating in positive mode and equipped with a nano electrospray ionization source. Capillary temperature was set to 275°C and source voltage to 1.4 kV. Survey scans were carried out in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over a mass range from 350 to 1700 m/z at a resolution of 60 000 (at 400 m/z). The target value for the automatic gain control was 1 000 000, and the maximum fill time was 200 ms. The 20 most intense peptide ions (minimal signal intensity 500, excluding singly charged ions and ions with a charge state of four and up) were isolated, transferred to the linear ion trap (LTQ) part of the instrument and fragmented using collision-induced dissociation. Peptide fragments were analyzed using a maximal fill time of 200 ms and automatic gain control target value of 100 000 with the mass range set in dependency of parent mass using normal scan mode. Already fragmented ions were excluded for fragmentation for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was done using MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.3, MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) applying standard parameters. Searches were carried out based on 20183 Homo sapiens protein entries downloaded from the UniProtKB on 26th November 2014. Methionine oxidation and acetylation at protein N-termini were set as variable modification and carbamidomethylations at cysteines were considered as fixed modification. Peptides and proteins were accepted with a false discovery rate set to 1%. Unique and razor peptides were used for label-free quantification. The minimal ratio count was set to two and the matched between runs option was enabled. The normalized intensities as provided by MaxQuant were analyzed using Perseus framework (version 1.5.0.15, MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany). Only proteins with a minimum of 3 valid values in total were taken into consideration for protein quantification. Proteins which were identified only by site or marked as contaminant (from the MaxQuant contaminant list) were excluded from the analysis. For the calculation of enriched proteins in the two groups a Student’s t-test was applied. The significance analysis was applied on log2 transformed values after replacing missing values from a normal distribution (Width 0.3, Down shift 1.5) using a S0 constant = 0 and a 5% false discovery rate based cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tbk1, Sqstm1/p62, Tax1bp1, Fip200, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine I, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany
Institute of Molecular Medicine I
University Hospital Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Björn Stork

### Lab Head
Dr Björn Stork
Institute of Molecular Medicine I, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany


