### Accession
PXD037759

### Title
IRF1 mass-spectrometry primary fibroblasts non-stimulated or stimulated with IFNg for 24h

### Description
Inborn errors of human IFN-γ immunity underlie mycobacterial diseases, whereas inborn errors of IFN-a/b immunity underlie viral diseases. Both types of IFNs induce the transcription factor IRF1. We describe two unrelated children with inherited complete IRF1 deficiency and early-onset, multiple, life-threatening diseases caused by weakly virulent mycobacteria. These children have no history of severe viral disease, despite exposure to many viruses, including SARS-CoV-2, which is life-threatening in individuals with impaired IFN-a/b immunity. The IRF1-dependent cellular responses to IFN-γ are, both quantitatively and qualitatively, much greater than those to IFN-a/b in vitro. Monocyte- and iPSC-derived macrophages from the two patients show no upregulation of at least 20% of the target genes normally induced by IFN-γ. By contrast, cell-intrinsic IFN-a/b immunity to diverse viruses, including SARS-CoV-2, is intact. Human IRF1 is, thus, largely redundant for antiviral IFN-a/b immunity. By contrast, human IRF1 is essential for IFN-γ immunity to mycobacteria in myeloid cells.

### Sample Protocol
Primary fibroblasts were plated at the density of 180,000 cells/mL in 12 mL of DMEM supplemented with 10%FCS in T75 flasks. The day after, they were starved overnight and incubated or not for 24 hours with 1,000 IU/mL of IFN-γ. The day after, cells were harvested with trypsin, washed once in PBS, and protein were extracted for 40 minutes on ice (vortexed 15 s every 10 min), in the following SDS-free RIPA buffer: NaCl 150 mM, NP40 1% (#85124, ThermoScientific), TrisB 50 mM, EDTA 1 mM, and EDTA free protease inhibitor (#0469332001, Roche) in 80 to 120 µL of buffer according to the size of the pellet. They were then speed at 13,200 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C and supernatant containing protein extract was collected. Protein concentration was then determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit using standard test tube protocol. Integrity of the protein were determined using colloidal blue staining kit (#LC6025, Invitrogen). Sample were then stored at -80°C before being processed. 50ug of each sample was withdrawn for proteomics analysis. Cysteines were reduced and alkylated with DTT and IAA. Proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone and the pellet was dissolved in 200mM EPPs containing 1ug trypsin. Digestion proceeded overnight at room temperature, at which point 1 ug of trypsin was added and temperature was increased to 50C for 1h. Peptides were labeled with TMTpro, quenched with hydroxylamine and, once stoichiometry was verified, pooled. TMTpro peptides were separated first into two fractions by an in-house constructed SCX column. Both fractions were separated into 8 fractions by high-pH RP spin columns, and 8 fractions were concatenated yielding a total of 12 fractions. The fractionated peptides were separated across a 2-hour linear gradient and analyzed by LC-MSMS operating in DDA MS2 positive mode.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were queried against the human proteome at 1% FDR using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer v. 2.5. A spectral purity of 75% was required for increasing confidence in quantitation. Protein abundances were further processed within the Perseus statistical software environment. Abundances were log2 transformed and normalized to the median intensity witin each sample

### Publication Abstract
Inborn errors of human IFN-&#x3b3;-dependent macrophagic immunity underlie mycobacterial diseases, whereas inborn errors of IFN-&#x3b1;/&#x3b2;-dependent intrinsic immunity underlie viral diseases. Both types of IFNs induce the transcription factor IRF1. We describe unrelated children with inherited complete IRF1 deficiency and early-onset, multiple, life-threatening diseases caused by weakly virulent mycobacteria and related intramacrophagic pathogens. These children have no history of severe viral disease, despite exposure to many viruses, including SARS-CoV-2, which is life-threatening in individuals with impaired IFN-&#x3b1;/&#x3b2; immunity. In leukocytes or fibroblasts stimulated in&#xa0;vitro, IRF1-dependent responses to IFN-&#x3b3; are, both quantitatively and qualitatively, much stronger than those to IFN-&#x3b1;/&#x3b2;. Moreover, IRF1-deficient mononuclear phagocytes do not control mycobacteria and related pathogens normally when stimulated with IFN-&#x3b3;. By contrast, IFN-&#x3b1;/&#x3b2;-dependent intrinsic immunity to nine viruses, including SARS-CoV-2, is almost normal in IRF1-deficient fibroblasts. Human IRF1 is essential for IFN-&#x3b3;-dependent macrophagic immunity to mycobacteria, but largely redundant for IFN-&#x3b1;/&#x3b2;-dependent antiviral immunity.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ifng, Fibroblasts

### Affiliations
Research Support Specialist
St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA.

### Submitter
Soren Heissel

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Laurent Casanova
St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA.


