### Accession
PXD040355

### Title
Proteome of the EPS of Lotmaria passim promastigotes

### Description
Honeybee health is a major ecological, agricultural and societal concern due to the critical role of these insects for plant reproduction and the massive losses of colonies observed within the last decade. The search for abiotic (e.g. pesticides) and biotic (e.g. pathogens) stressors is essential for understanding bee declines and design protection plans. Flagellated Trypanosomatid protozoan parasites and particularly Lotmaria passim, are widely distributed in honeybee colonies and have been associated with colony losses. However, little is known about their life cycles, routes for transmission and the strategies for survival inside and outside their hosts. Here we describe the proteome of L. passim Extracellular polymeric substances linked to secretion of Extracellular vesicles using liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The EPS-EVs composition will provide clues on how these pathogens survive and spread in apiaries worldwide.

### Sample Protocol
To isolate the EPS fraction of promastigote (L. passim) the parasites were cultured up to the latelog phaseof growth (1-2x107 cells/ml). At this stage, cell cultures were centrifuged at 2.000 x g for 10 minutes and peleds washed twice in Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS) pH:7.2. Next, the cultures were centrifuged at 2.000 x g and the supernatants filtered through a 0.55 μm pore filter (Sartorius, Germany). Finally, the filtered media was ultracentrifuged at 100.000 x g for 4h to obtain EVs-EPS. All the steps were performed in an ultracentrifuge Avanti J-301 (Beckman Coulter, USA) with a JA-30.50 Ti rotor. The resulting pellet was washed three times in PBS in an ultracentrifuge Sorwal WX80 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with F50L-24 x 1.5 fixed-angle rotor and resuspended in 100 μL PBS. Protein extracts from EPS were resuspended in a volume up to 50 µl of sample buffer, and then applied onto 1.2-cm wide wells of a conventional SDS-PAGE gel (0.75 mm thick, 4% stacking and 10% resolving). The run was stopped as soon as the front entered 3 mm into the resolving gel, so that the whole proteome became concentrated in the stacking/resolving gel interface. The unseparated protein bands were visualized by Coomassie staining, excised, cut into cubes (2 × 2 mm), and placed in 0.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes. The gel pieces were destained in acetonitrile:water (ACN:H2O, 1:1) and disulfide bonds from cysteinyl residues were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 56 °C. Then, thiol groups were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the darkness and digested in situ with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) as described by Shevchenko et al. in 1996 with minor modifications. The gel pieces were shrunk by removing all liquid using sufficient ACN. Acetonitrile was pipetted out and the gel pieces were dried in a SpeedVac™. The dried gel pieces were re-swollen in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.8 with 60 ng/µl trypsin at 5:1 protein:trypsin (w/w) ratio. The tubes were kept in ice for 2 h and incubated at 37 °C for 12 h. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Whole supernatants were dried down and then desalted onto ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore), OMIX pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) or OASIS C18 columns (Waters) until mass spectrometric analysis. The desalted protein digest was dried, resuspended in 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by reversed-phase liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC-MS/MS) in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQOrbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1 mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and then separated using a 0.075 mm × 250 mm C18 RP column (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 240-min dual gradient from 5 to 25% solvent B for 180 min followed by a gradient from 25 to 40% solvent B over 240 min (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water; solvent B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water). Electrospray ionization (ESI) ionization was performed using a Nanobore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface. The Orbitrap resolution was set at 30,000. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan), followed by fifteen data-dependent MS/MS scans (Top 15), using an isolation width of 2 u (in mass to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 35%, and dynamic exclusion applied during 30 s periods.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.4, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). A database search was performed (UniProt-Leishmania major, Uniprot-Bos taurus y Uniprot-Apis mellifera). The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites and tolerances of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragment ions, and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation and Cys carbamidomethylation. A search was performed against the decoy database (integrated decoy approach) using a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular polymeric substances, Lotmaria passim, Kinetoplastid, Trypanosomatid, Extracellular vesicles.

### Affiliations
Universidad de Granada
Departament of Parasitology CTS183 University of Granada

### Submitter
Jéssica Carreira de Paula

### Lab Head
Dr Luis miguel de pablos
Departament of Parasitology CTS183 University of Granada


