### Accession
PXD002936

### Title
The Proteome of the Infectious Bronchitis Virus Beau-R Virion

### Description
Infectious bronchitis is a highly contagious respiratory disease of poultry caused by the coronavius infectious bronchitis virus (IBV).  Until recently is was thought that coronavirus virions were composed of the structural proteins nucleocapsid, envelope, spike and membrane proteins, but investigations of TGEV and SARS-CoV have shown the proteome of coronavirus virions also includes viral non-structural and group specific proteins as well as host cell proteins.  To study the proteome of IBV virions, virus was grown in embryonated chicken eggs and purified by sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation.  Purified virus was analysed using sensitive gel-free proteomic techniques to determine the proteome of IBV.  Analysis of three preparations of purified IBV yielded a list of 39 proteins commonly associated with the IBV virion.  Three of these proteins were the viral structural proteins spike, membrane and nucleocapsid, but none of the viral non-strucutral or groups specific proteins could be identified.  The other 35 proteins commonly associated to the IBV virion were all found to be host cell proteins.  These proteins were classified into 12 categories using pantherdb (pantherdb.org).  These proteins were involved in a diverse range of functions such as cytoskeletal proteins, nucleic acid binding proteins and chaperone proteins.  Some of these proteins were unique to this study, whilst others were found to be orthologous to proteins identified in the SARS-CoV protein, and indeed some were also identified in association with virions from a number of other RNA and DNA viruses.

### Sample Protocol
Viruses and Cells IBV Beau-R was propagated in ten-day-old, SPF Rhode Island Red chicken eggs. Eggs were inoculated with IBV into the allantoic cavity. At 24 hrs post infection, eggs were sacrificed by refrigeration and allantoic fluid was harvested.  Viruses were diluted to 1× BES IBV growth media for inoculation [1× modified Eagle's medium (E-MEM, Sigma), 0.3% tryptose phosphate broth (TPB, BDH), 0.2% bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma), 20 mM BES (N,N-bis(2-hydroxyethyl)-2-aminoethanesulphonic acid, Sigma), 0.21% sodium bicarbonate, 2 mM l-glutamine, 250 U/ml nystatin, and 100 U/ml penicillin and streptomycin].  This was also used for mock infections by inoculation with 1x BES only.   IBV purification Purification was performed using the method of Dent & Neuman, 2015.  Briefly, harvested allantoic fluid was centrifuged at 1000 x g for 10 mins to pellet particulates.  IBV in allantoic fluid was concentrated by PEG precipitation. PEG-8000 and sodium chloride were added to allantoic fluid to final concentrations of 10%, and 2.2% respectively. The solution was stirred constantly on ice for 30 mins once PEG and sodium chloride had dissolved to allow precipitating out of IBV. Suspension was then centrifuged at 10,000 x g to pellet the precipitate. Precipitate was resuspended in HEPES saline (10 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 0.9% NaCl in water) then layered onto sucrose. Virus was purified by banding between 30% and 50% sucrose cushions at 100,000 x g for 90 mins.  Purifications of mock infected allantoic fluid from eggs infected with 1x BES IBV growth media were also performed in the same way.  Although it was possible to collect the interface between the 2 sucrose cushions, unlike IBV infected allantoic fluid, there was no cloudy white band present.  Analysis of purified virus by SDS-PAGE Purified virus was mixed with sample buffer (200 mM Tris pH 6.8, 400 mM DTT, 8% SDS, 0.4% bromophenol blue, 40% glycerol) and heated. Ten μl was loaded on a 4-20% tris-glycine-SDS PAGE gel. For western blot analysis, proteins were transferred by wet blot onto PVDF membrane and probed with rabbit anti-IBV (1 in 5000 dilution), followed by anti-rabbit-HRP (1 in 5000 dilution) and developed with ECL reagent.  For commassie staining, gels were stained with colloidal coomassie (Neuhoff et al., 1988).  For mock infected material purified by sucrose gradient, no proteins were found to be present in the sample.  Mass spectrometry analysis Purified IBV was resuspended in 0.1% RapiGestTM (Waters) diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8. To lyse virions, the suspension was sonicated for 15 mins, then heated to 80 °C for 10 mins before a further 15 mins sonication. Total protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce) using the micro plate method.  Briefly, 25 μl of protein sample was incubated with 200 μl BCA assay reagent for 30 mins at 37 °C. Absorbance was measured at 562 nm and protein concentrations determined from a BSA standard curve. Samples were reduced by addition of DTT to a final concentration of 3 mM and heating at 60 °C for 10 mins. Samples were cooled to room temperature then alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 9 mM and incubation at 20 °C for 10 mins in the dark. Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) was reconstituted in 50 mM acetic acid to a concentration of 0.2 μg/μl. Samples were digested by the addition of 10 μl of trypsin to the sample followed by incubation at 37 °C overnight. The RapiGest TM was removed from the sample by acidication (1 μl of trifluoroacetic acid and incubation at 37 °C for 45 mins) and centrifugation (15,000 x g for 15 mins).  Peptide mixtures were analyzed by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography (nLC) using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters MS technologies, Manchester,UK) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientic, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer equipped with the manufacturer s nanospray ion source. The analytical column (nanoACQUITY UPLC TM BEH130 C18 15 cm x 75 m, 1.7 μm capillary column) was maintained at 35 °C and a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient consisted of 3-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 90 mins then a ramp of 40-85% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 3 min. Full scan MS spectra (m/z range 300-2000) were acquired by the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. Analysis was performed in data dependent mode. The top 20 most intense ions from MS1 scan (full MS) were selected for tandem MS by collision induced dissociation (CID) and all product spectra were acquired in the LTQ ion trap. Ion trap and orbitrap maximal injection times were set to 50 ms and 500 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis Thermo RAW files were imported into Progenesis LC MS (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). Replicate runs were time-aligned using default settings. Peaks were picked by the software using default settings and filtered to include only peaks with a charge state of between +2 and +6.  Peptide intensities of replicates were normalised against the reference run by Progenesis LC-MS. Spectral data were exported for peptide identification using the Mascot v2.3 (Matrix Science). Tandem MS data were searched against a custom database that contained the common contamination and internal standards such as keratins and trypsin, and the Chicken database (Uniprot, reviewed October 2013) concatenated to a custom database of IBV ORFs.   The custom IBV Database consisted of all known IBV ORFs and any other potential ORF (an AUG start codon to STOP codon) outside of the known reading frames greater than 50 amino acids in length, due to the recent discovery of potential for IBV to encode extra proteins (Bentley et al., 2012).  Lists of all identified proteins were submitted to pantherDB to determine the functional classification of those proteins (Mi et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
Infectious bronchitis is a highly contagious respiratory disease of poultry caused by the coronavirus infectious bronchitis virus (IBV). It was thought that coronavirus virions were composed of three major viral structural proteins until investigations of other coronaviruses showed that the virions also include viral non-structural and genus-specific accessory proteins as well as host-cell proteins. To study the proteome of IBV virions, virus was grown in embryonated chicken eggs, purified by sucrose-gradient ultracentrifugation and analysed by mass spectrometry. Analysis of three preparations of purified IBV yielded the three expected structural proteins plus 35 additional virion-associated host proteins. The virion-associated host proteins had a diverse range of functional attributions, being involved in cytoskeleton formation, RNA binding and protein folding pathways. Some of these proteins were unique to this study, while others were found to be orthologous to proteins identified in severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus virions and also virions from a number of other RNA and DNA viruses.

### Keywords
Beau-r virion, Infectious bronchitis virus

### Affiliations
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Keele University, UK
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Dong Xia

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan M Wastling
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Keele University, UK


