### Accession
PXD005635

### Title
Detecting Proteins Glycosylation by a Homogeneous Reac-tion System with Zwitterionic Gold Nanoclusters

### Description
Homogeneous gold nanoclusters (Au NCs) have been widely utilized in drug delivery, chemical sensing, bioassays and bio-labeling due to their unique physical and chemical properties. However, few attentions have been paid on their application in detecting protein post-translational modifications. Herein, we developed a homogeneous reaction system with water-soluble zwitterionic Au NCs to capture glycopeptides from the complex biological samples for the first time. The unique characteristics of Au NCs, such as the molecular-like property, the excellent homogeneity in aqueous solution and organic solvent responsive precipitation, the easy preparation in only 4.5 hours, contribute to the high efficiency and high through-put for capturing the targeted glycopeptides. Briefly, the Au NCs and tryptic protein samples were incubated together in a homogeneous aqueous solution and then the glycopeptides were collected by co-precipitation with zwitterionic Au NCs dur-ing gradually dropping addition of acetonitrile. Compared with the conventional heterogeneous system with solid-state ad-sorbents, the number of characterized glycosylation sites was improved 35%. Finally, the MS detection limitation as low as 50 amol was achieved for the tryptic digests of standard glycoprotein (IgG) and 1576 glycosylation sites from 713 glycopro-teins were feasibly identified from only 60 μg mouse liver proteins

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of glycopeptides by the homogeneous reaction system Step 1: Preparation of 1% TFA (ACN), the aqueous solution of Au NCs and tryptic protein sample. Step 2: 40 µL Au NCs and 3 µL protein sample were mixed together and shocked at 1050 rpm for 2 min. Step 3: 356 µL 1% TFA (ACN) were added dropwise in about 30 s and the mixture were furtherly shocked for 30 s. Then the Au NCs were collected by centrifugation. Step 4 for washing: The precipitated Au NCs were re-dissolved into 40 µL pure H2O and the solution were shocked at 1050 rpm for 2 min. Step 5: Repeat the Step 3. Step 6: Repeat the Step 4-5 for another 1-2 times. Step 7 for elution: The Au NCs were dispersed in 20 µL 30%ACN/0.1% TFA solution and shocked for 5 min. After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and lyophilized for MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw data files were analyzed with Maxquant software (version 1.3.0.5) against a UniProt.mouse.fasta database (downloaded on April 9, 2014) with the default settings. Only glycopeptides with the N-!P-S/T or N-X-C conserved sequences were considered as highly reliable results.

### Publication Abstract
Homogeneous gold nanoclusters (Au NCs) have been widely utilized in drug delivery, chemical sensing, bioassays, and biolabeling due to their unique physical and chemical properties. However, little attention has been paid to their application in detecting protein post-translational modifications. Herein, we describe the development of a homogeneous reaction system with water-soluble zwitterionic Au NCs to capture glycopeptides from complex biological samples. The unique characteristics of Au NCs, such as their molecular-like properties, the excellent homogeneity in aqueous solution, the organic solvent responsive precipitation, and the easy preparation in only 4.5 h, contribute to the high efficiency and high throughput for capturing the targeted glycopeptides. Compared with the conventional heterogeneous system with solid-state adsorbents, the number of characterized glycosylation sites was improved by 35%. Finally, an MS detection limit as low as 50 amol was achieved for the standard glycoprotein (IgG), and 1576 glycosylation sites from 713 glycoproteins were identified from only 60 &#x3bc;g of mouse liver protein. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005635.

### Keywords
Homogeneous reaction system, Gold cluster, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics

### Submitter
Jinan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Fangjun Wang
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics


