### Accession
PXD009033

### Title
Identifying the interacting proteins of lignin biosynthetic P450 enzymes by affinity purification coupled with LC-MS/MS analysis

### Description
This project aims to identify the potential interacting proteins of lignin biosynthetic P450 enzymes by affinity purification and LC-MS/MS analysis. To this end, the genomic pieces of three lignin biosynthetic P450 genes C4H, C3’H and F5H were cloned into pMDCpC4H-HPB vector to generate HPB-fusion constructs driven by C4H promoter. The resulted constructs were then respectively transformed into ref3-3 (for C4H), Col-0 WT (for C3'H), and fah1-2 (for F5H) backgrounds and pMDCpC4H-HPB empty vector (as control) was transformed into Col-0 WT to generate transgenic plants. Arabidopsis T2 transgenic plants were grown for 5 weeks in soil and 15 grams of stem tissues were collected for protein extraction. Membrane protein complex was purified by affinity purification using streptavidin beads and subject to LC-MS/MS analysis. Two biological repeats were performed for each construct. For the first repeat (gel-base proteomics), each P450 construct has its control since each experiment was performed separately. For the second repeat (affinity purification,AP-MS), one control was shared for all the three P450 genes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extraction and membrane protein complex purification followed the protocol previously described (Qi et al., 2007). For in-gel trypsin digestion, proteins were first eluted by boiling the washed protein-bound magnetic beads for 5 min in 1x SDS loading buffer and then resolved on 10% SDS PAGE gel and stained with Coomassie Blue R250. Protein gels for the control and P450-HPB samples were sliced for the in-gel digestion. Excised gel pieces were destained, reduced, aklyated and digested with trypsin (Promega Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade) essentially as described by Shevchenko et al. (1996). For on-bead trypsin digestion, washed magnetic beads with affinity captured were resuspended in 8M urea, 25 mM NH4HCO3.  The proteins in the suspension were reduced with 4.1 mM dithiothreitol 30min at room temperature (RT) and akylated in the dark with 8.5 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, RT. The protein suspension was diluted to 1.7 M urea with, 25 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (Promega Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade), at 37°C, 18h.  The resulting peptide solutions were brought to 2% formic acid (FA) and desalted with Pierce C18 micropipette tips, 100 ul size (Product #87784) using FA containing solutions with varied acetonitrile (ACN) essentially as described in vendor’s bulletin.  The solvent was removed from the eluted peptides using a vacuum centrifuge and the resultant dried peptides stored at -80 °C.   The dried peptides were dissolved in a solution of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA (buffer A) for analysis by automated microcapillary liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).   For LC-MS/MS, Fused-silica capillaries (100 µm inner diameter - i.d.) were pulled using a P-2000 CO2 laser puller (Sutter Instruments, Novato, CA) to a 5 µm i.d. tip and packed with 10 cm of 5 µm ProntoSil 120-5-C18H (Bischoff Chromatography, Leonberg, Germany ) using a pressure bomb. The samples were loaded via an Dionex WPS-3000 autosampler, part of an Dionex Ultimate 3000 system (Germering, Germany). The column was installed in-line with a Dionex LPG-3000 Chromatography HPLC pump running at 300 nL min-1. The peptides were eluted from the column by applying a 5 min gradient from 2% buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) to 10% buffer B, followed by a 60 min gradient from 10% buffer B to 45% buffer B. The gradient was switched from 45% to 80% buffer B over 10 min. Finally, the gradient was changed from 80 % buffer B to 2 % buffer B over 10 min, and then held constant at 2% buffer B for 20 more minutes. The application of a 2.2 kV distal voltage electrosprayed the eluting peptides directly into an LTQ Orbitrap XL ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA) equipped with a nano-liquid chromatography electrospray ionization source. Full mass spectra (MS) were recorded on the peptides over a 400 to 2000 m/z range at 60,000 resolution, followed by top-five MS/MS scans in the ion-trap. Charge state dependent screening was turned on, and peptides with a charge state of +2 or higher were analyzed. Mass spectrometer scan functions and HPLC solvent gradients were controlled by the Xcalibur data system (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted from the RAW files with ReAdW.exe (http://sourceforge.net/projects/sashimi). The resulting mzXML data files were searched with Inspect  and GPM X!Tamdem (vers. 2.2.1) programs against a custom database downloaded from Uniprot composed of the arabidopsis thaliana and tobacco  proteomes with added sequences for common contaminants.  Fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation and optional methionine oxidation and threonine, serine and tyrosine phosphorylation were applied during the search.

### Publication Abstract
Lignin is a complex and irregular biopolymer of crosslinked phenylpropanoid units in plant secondary cell walls. Its biosynthesis requires three endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident cytochrome P450 monooxygenases, C4H, C3'H and F5H, to establish the structural characteristics of its monomeric precursors. These P450 enzymes were reported to associate with each other or potentially with other soluble monolignol biosynthetic enzymes to form an enzyme complex or a metabolon. However, the molecular basis governing such enzyme or pathway organization remains elusive. Here, we show that Arabidopsis membrane steroid-binding proteins (MSBPs) serve as a scaffold to physically organize monolignol P450 monooxygenases, thereby regulating the lignin biosynthetic process. We find that although C4H, C3'H and F5H are in spatial proximity to each other on the ER membrane in vivo, they do not appear to directly interact with each other. Instead, two MSBP proteins physically interact with all three P450 enzymes and, moreover, MSBPs themselves associate as homomers and heteromers on the ER membrane, thereby organizing P450 clusters. Downregulation of MSBP genes does not affect the transcription levels of monolignol biosynthetic P450 genes but substantially impairs the stability and activity of the MSBP-interacting P450 enzymes and, consequently, lignin deposition, and the accumulation of soluble phenolics in the monolignol branch but not in the flavonoid pathway. Our study suggests that MSBP proteins are essential structural components in the ER membrane that physically organize and stabilize the monolignol biosynthetic P450 enzyme complex, thereby specifically controlling phenylpropanoid-monolignol branch biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Lignin, C4h, F5h, Lc-ms/ms, Affinity purification, C3'h

### Affiliations
Biology Department Brookhaven National Laboratory Upton, NY  11793
Brookhaven National Laboratory

### Submitter
Chang-Jun Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Chang-Jun Liu
Biology Department Brookhaven National Laboratory Upton, NY  11793


