### Accession
PXD025439

### Title
Membrane enriched temperature series proteome of Francisella tularensis subspecies novicida in wild type and lipid A acyltransferase null mutants.

### Description
Quantitative proteomics has matured into an established tool and longitudinal proteomic experiments have begun to emerge. However, no effective, simple-to-use differential expression method for longitudinal proteomics data has been released. Typically, such data is noisy, contains missing values, has only few time points and biological replicates. To address this need, we provide a comprehensive evaluation of several existing differential expression methods for high-throughput longitudinal omics data and introduce a new method, Robust longitudinal Differential Expression (RolDE). To evaluate the longitudinal differential expression methods in a real proteomics study setting, we generated and used an experimental membrane enriched longitudinal proteomics data of Francisella tularensis subspecies novicida (Fn). For evaluation of the methods, differential expression between the null mutant and the wild type strains was investigated,while their growth at different temperatures offered a surrogate for the different time points. Technical replicates of the samples were used to form technical replicate datasets analyzed with the different methods to evaluate the reproducibility of the methods. In addition, the Fn dataset with known protein modifications, was used to explore the evaluated methods ability to detect these proteins and other closely associated pathway proteins expected to be affected.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type Franicsella tularensis subspecies novicida (Fn) strain U112 was originally obtained from Professor Francis Nano (University of Victoria, Canada) and maintained at-80C. The lpxD1, lpxD2, and lpxL-null mutants were generated previously (see Methods of the related manuscript). The lpxL strain used was a transposon insertion mutant of FTN_0071 (lpxL) identified as: tnfn1_pw060510p04q127 carrying a kanamycin cassette disrupting the coding sequence. The mutant was functionally characterized as having an lpxL knockout lipid A phenotype. All bacterial strains were grown in tryptic soy broth supplemented with 0.1% cysteine at the designated temperatures (18°C, 21°C, 25°C, 32°C, 37°C). Cultures were harvested at log phase, supernatant was aspirated, and cell pellets were flash frozen and stored at -80C until processing. To isolate a fraction of proteins enriched in membrane proteins, cell pellets were first fractionated along the lines of a prior report (see Methods of the related manuscript) with the following adjustments. Briefly, cell pellets were resuspended in 0.1M NaPO4, 0.05M MgSOD4, DNaseI digested, and sonicated. Unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was again subjected to centrifugation at 39,000xg for 45 minutes. The resulting pellet, which contained the membrane envelope, was resuspended in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to trypsin digestion as previously described. After digestion, samples were desalted using MACROspin C18 columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA). The flow-through was collected, concentrated in a speedvac to near dryness, and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for MS analysis. Samples were stored at -80C until MS analysis. The membrane samples were prepared for proteomic analysis by high performance liquid chromatograpghy (HPLC)-tandem mass spectrometry according to previously published protocols (see Methods of the related manuscript) for analysis on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo-Fisher). Mass spectrometry data were collected over a 95 min LC gradient by data-dependent acquisition using a full MS scan for 350–2,000 m/z range at 120K resolution. Top 15 ions were selected with an isolation width of 2 m/z for fragmentation by CID, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data files were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.5.0). The peptide and protein identifications were performed using the Andromeda search engine witha SwissProt/UniProt FASTA database of all the reviewed and unreviewed protein sequences for Francisella tularensis subspecies novicida strain U112 (April 2019). Trypsin digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications were used as search parameters. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 at the peptide and protein level was applied. The ‘match between the runs’ option was enabled with the default time window of 0.7 min and the alignment time window size was 20 min. MaxQuant was allowed to automatically align the runs. Match type was ‘match from and to’. ‘RequireMS/MS for comparisons’ was on, and decoy mode was ‘revert’. MaxQuant’s label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to calculate the relative protein intensity profiles across the samples. ‘Advanced ratio estimation’, ‘stabilize large LFQ ratios’ and ‘advanced site intensities’ were on.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomics has matured into an established tool and longitudinal proteomics experiments have begun to emerge. However, no effective, simple-to-use differential expression method for longitudinal proteomics data has been released. Typically, such data is noisy, contains missing values, and has only few time points and biological replicates. To address this need, we provide a comprehensive evaluation of several existing differential expression methods for high-throughput longitudinal omics data and introduce a Robust longitudinal Differential Expression (RolDE) approach. The methods are evaluated using over 3000 semi-simulated spike-in proteomics datasets and three large experimental datasets. In the comparisons, RolDE performs overall best; it is most tolerant to missing values, displays good reproducibility and is the top method in ranking the results in a biologically meaningful way. Furthermore, RolDE is suitable for different types of data with typically unknown patterns in longitudinal expression and can be applied by non-experienced users.

### Keywords
Francisella tularensis subspecies novicida, Lpxd2, Lpxd1, Temperature series, Francisella novicida, Orbitrap elite, Lpxl, Lipid a, Knockout, Francisella tularensis

### Affiliations
University of Turku
University of Victoria – Victoria, British Columbia, Canada V8P 3E6; International Centre for Cancer Vaccine Science, Gdansk, Poland

### Submitter
Tommi Välikangas

### Lab Head
Dr David R. Goodlett
University of Victoria – Victoria, British Columbia, Canada V8P 3E6; International Centre for Cancer Vaccine Science, Gdansk, Poland


