### Accession
PXD030111

### Title
Suppressors of amyloid-beta toxicity improve recombinant protein production by reducing oxidative stress and tunning cellular metabolism

### Description
In this study, we used a yeast Alzheimer’s disease model in which amyloid-β peptides (Aβ42) accumulate and induce stress-related phenotypes similar to overexpression of recombinant proteins. We validated that suppressors of Aβ42 cytotoxicity could reduce cell stress and improve recombinant protein production. Omics analyses and reverse metabolic engineering reveal potential regulatory hubs in cellular metabolism and protein synthesis, which may provide guidelines for engineering other cell factories for efficient protein production.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were suspended in 200 ul of the lysis buffer containing 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and homogenized using lysis matrix D (1.4 mm ceramic spheres) on a FastPrep(R)-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) for 4 repeated 40 second cycles at 6.5 m/s. Lysed samples were centrifuged at 16,200xg for 10 min and the supernatants were transferred to clean tubes. The pellets were washed with 200 ul of the lysis buffer, centrifuged at 16,200xg for 10 min, and the supernatants were combined with the corresponding lysates from the previous step. Protein concentrations in the lysates were determined using Pierce(TM) BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and the Benchmark(TM) Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) solutions as standards. Aliquots containing equal protein amount from each replicate were mixed to yield the pooled reference sample. An aliquot containing 35 ug of total protein from each sample was incubated at 37deg. C for 60 min in the lysis buffer with DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) at 100 mM final concentration. The reduced samples were processed via the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, the reduced samples were diluted to 1:4 by 8M urea solution, transferred onto Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY, USA) and washed repeatedly with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer containing 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and 50 mM TEAB. Free cysteine residues were modified using 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) solution in digestion buffer for 20 min at room temperature and the filters were washed twice with 100 ul of digestion buffer. Pierce trypsin protease (MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in digestion buffer was added at a ratio of 1:100 relative to total protein mass and the samples were incubated at 37deg. C overnight, then an additional 1:100 portion of trypsin was added and incubated for 3 more hours. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and labeled using Tandem Mass Tag (TMTpro 16plex) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Labeled peptide samples were combined into one pooled sample, concentrated using vacuum centrifugation, and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and subsequent centrifugation. The labeled pooled samples were treated with HiPPR detergent removal kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Pooled TMTpro labelling set was fractionated into 40 primary fractions via basic-pH reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) on an XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) using Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific), solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% solvent A. Forty primary fractions were collected linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 18 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min and hold at 100% B for 5 min; the primary fractions were concatenated into 20 final fractions (1+21, 2+22 etc), dried and reconstituted in 15μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for protein identification and quantification. Reference database for Saccharomyces cerevisiae ATCC 204508 / S288c was downloaded from Uniprot (November 2019) and supplemented with common proteomic contaminant sequences. Mascot version 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) was used as a database search engine; 5 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment tolerance; trypsin with 1 allowed missed cleavage as an enzyme rule; oxidation on methionine as a variable modification; methylthiolation on cysteine as a fixed modification; Percolator for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. Reporter ions were identified within 3 mmu in MS3 spectra, quantification was based on unique peptides and reporter S/N, with the correction for isotopic impurities, the average reporter S/N threshold of 10 and SPS match threshold of 40%; reporter normalization on total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
High-level production of recombinant proteins in industrial microorganisms is often limited by the formation of misfolded proteins or protein aggregates, which consequently induce cellular stress responses. We hypothesized that in a yeast Alzheimer's disease (AD) model overexpression of amyloid-&#x3b2; peptides (A&#x3b2;42), one of the main peptides relevant for AD pathologies, induces similar phenotypes of cellular stress. Using this humanized AD model, we previously identified suppressors of A&#x3b2;42 cytotoxicity. Here we hypothesize that these suppressors could be used as metabolic engineering targets to alleviate cellular stress and improve recombinant protein production in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Forty-six candidate genes were individually deleted and twenty were individually overexpressed. The positive targets that increased recombinant &#x3b1;-amylase production were further combined leading to an 18.7-fold increased recombinant protein production. These target genes are involved in multiple cellular networks including RNA processing, transcription, ER-mitochondrial complex, and protein unfolding. By using transcriptomics and proteomics analyses, combined with reverse metabolic engineering, we showed that reduced oxidative stress, increased membrane lipid biosynthesis and repressed arginine and sulfur amino acid biosynthesis are significant pathways for increased recombinant protein production. Our findings provide new insights towards developing synthetic yeast cell factories for biosynthesis of valuable proteins.

### Keywords
Yeast, Alzheimer’s disease, Tandem mass tag, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Amyloid-beta, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Division of Systems and Synthetic Biology, Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96, Gothenburg, Sweden
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Engqvist
Division of Systems and Synthetic Biology, Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96, Gothenburg, Sweden


