### Accession
PXD037418

### Title
The antimicrobial peptide Magainin-2 interacts with BamA impairing folding of E. coli membrane proteins

### Description
In this paper we investigated the mechanism of action of Maganin-2 (Mag-2), a well-known antimicrobial peptide isolated from the African clawed frog Xenopus laevis, by functional proteomic approaches. Several proteins belonging to E. coli macromolecular membrane complexes were identified as Mag-2 putative interactors. Among these, we focused our attention on BamA a membrane protein belonging to the BAM complex responsible for the folding and insertion of nascent β‐barrel Outer Membrane Proteins (OMPs) in the outer membrane. In silico predictions by molecular modelling and in vitro fluorescence binding and Light Scattering experiments carried out using a recombinant form of BamA confirmed the formation of a stable Mag-2/BamA complex and indicated a high affinity of the peptide for BamA.  The functional implications of these interactions were investigated by two alternative and complementary approaches. The number of outer membrane proteins OmpA and OmpF produced in E. coli following Mag-2 incubation was evaluated by both western blot analysis and quantitative tandem mass spectrometry in MRM scan mode. In both experiments, a gradual decrease in outer membrane protein production with time was observed because of Mag-2 treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The pull-down experiment was performed using 200 μL of dried avidin-conjugated agarose beads. A resin with free agarose beads was used for the pre-cleaning, and a resin incubated with a solution of 2 mg/mL of biotinylated Mag-2 for 30 minutes at 4 °C under stirring was used for the pull-down assay. The supernatant was removed by centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 minutes at 3000 rpm and the resin equilibrated with 5 volumes of binding buffer at 4 °C. On the pre-cleaning resin, 2.5 mg of membrane proteins were incubated at 4 °C for 2h under stirring to remove possible non-specific interactors. Indeed, only the supernatant containing the unbound membrane proteins was recovered by centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 minutes at 3000 rpm and then transferred on the pull-down resin for 3h at 4° C under stirring. The beads were washed with 5 volumes of binding buffer and the peptide interacting proteins were released by competitive elution with 500 μL of elution buffer containing an excess of biotin (2mM) for 1h at 4 °C under stirring. Mag-2 putative protein interactors were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and the protein bands from both the sample and the control lanes were excised from the gel and subjected to in situ hydrolysis with trypsin. The resulting peptide mixtures were directly analyzed by Liquid Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an LTQ Orbitrap XL-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS and MS/MS data were converted in a .mgf file by using Mass Hunter software (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States) to be used for protein identification with a licensed version of Mascot Software (London, United Kingdom). Searches were performed by using UniProtKB and NCBI protein database with E. coli sapiens taxonomy. Mascot search parameters were as follows: trypsin as an enzyme, allowed number of missed cleavage 3; carbamidomethyl, C as fixed modifications; oxidation of methionine (Met), pyro-Glu (N-terminal Gln and Glu) as variable modifications and peptide charge from +2 to +4. Mass tolerance value of 10 ppm was set for the precursor and 0.2 for the fragment ions. Proteins identified with least 1 peptide displaying a p-value < 0.05were selected as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are a unique and diverse group of molecules endowed with a broad spectrum of antibiotics properties that are being considered as new alternative therapeutic agents. Most of these peptides are membrane-active molecules, killing bacteria by membrane disruption. However, recently an increasing number of AMPs was shown to enter bacterial cells and target intracellular processes fundamental for bacterial life. In this paper we investigated the mechanism of action of Maganin-2 (Mag-2), a well-known antimicrobial peptide isolated from the African clawed frog <i>Xenopus laevis</i>, by functional proteomic approaches. Several proteins belonging to <i>E. coli</i> macromolecular membrane complexes were identified as Mag-2 putative interactors. Among these, we focused our attention on BamA a membrane protein belonging to the BAM complex responsible for the folding and insertion of nascent &#x3b2;-barrel Outer Membrane Proteins (OMPs) in the outer membrane. <i>In silico</i> predictions by molecular modelling, <i>in vitro</i> fluorescence binding and Light Scattering experiments carried out using a recombinant form of BamA confirmed the formation of a stable Mag-2/BamA complex and indicated a high affinity of the peptide for BamA. Functional implications of this interactions were investigated by two alternative and complementary approaches. The amount of outer membrane proteins OmpA and OmpF produced in <i>E. coli</i> following Mag-2 incubation were evaluated by both western blot analysis and quantitative tandem mass spectrometry in Multiple Reaction Monitoring scan mode. In both experiments a gradual decrease in outer membrane proteins production with time was observed as a consequence of Mag-2 treatment. These results suggested BamA as a possible good target for the rational design of new antibiotics since this protein is responsible for a crucial biological event of bacterial life and is absent in humans.

### Keywords
Structural and functional characterization, Proteomics, Antimicrobial peptides, Mechanism of action, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Science, University of Naples 'Federico II'
Department of chemical science University of Naples

### Submitter
Gabriella Pinto

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Angela Amoresano
Department of Chemical Science, University of Naples 'Federico II'


