### Accession
PXD018005

### Title
ACBD5 phosphorylationsite analysis

### Description
Peroxisomes (POs) and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) cooperate in cellular lipid metabolism and form membrane contacts, which are mediated by the peroxisomal membrane proteins acyl-coenzyme A-binding domain protein 4 and 5 (ACBD4/5) which bind to the resident ER protein vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B (VAPB). ACBD4/5 bind to the major sperm protein (MSP) domain of VAPB via their FFAT-like [two phenylalanines (FF) in an acidic tract] motif. The molecular mechanisms which regulate membrane contact site formation and dynamics are not well explored, in particular in mammalian cells. Here, we reveal that peroxisome-ER associations via the ACBD5-VAPB tether are regulated by phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-ACBD5 expressed in COS-7 cells was immunoprecipitated using anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma) as described above. Subsequently, beads were washed twice in ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM) and cysteine residues were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (20 min, 800 rpm, 37°C) and subsequently alkylated with 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide (20 min, 800 rpm, 25°C). Proteins were either digested on-bead with sequencing grade trypsin (1:50) (Promega, Walldorf, Germany) for 4 h at 800 rpm or 42°C or thermolysine (1:50) (Promega, Walldorf, Germany) for 2 h at 800 rpm and 60°C. Peptides were acidified using TFA at a final concentration of 1% and phosphopeptide enrichment was performed with 9/10 of the sample as described previously with slight modifications (Humphrey et al., 2018) . Titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads were washed before incubation with peptides using elution and wash buffer. C8 stage tips were pre-equilibrated with methanol and wash buffer. Enrichen and non-enriched peptides were desalted separatelyas described before(Rappsilber et al., 2003) .  Reversed-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was performed using the UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex LC Packings/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) instrument. The UHPLC system was equipped with two pre-columns (either nanoEase™ M/Z Symmetry C18, 100Å, 5µm, Waters or μPAC™ trapping column, PharmaFluidics) and a corresponding analytical column (either 25 cm nanoEase™ M/Z HSS C18 T3 column, Waters or 50 cm μPAC™ column, PharmaFluidics). The MS instrument was externally calibrated using standard compounds and equipped with a nano electrospray ion source and a fused silica emitter (New Objectives). For MS analysis, dried peptides were resolved in 15 µl 0.1% TFA and analysed with an 1h LC method. Gradients were applied using a binary solvent systems of 0.1% FA (v/v, solvent A, ‘A’) and 0.1% FA/86% acetonitrile (v/v, solvent B, ‘B’). For nanoEase column setup, a gradient from 4% B to 42% B in 30 min and to 95% B in 3 min was performed, followed by a re-equilibration with 4% B for 16 min. µPAC columns were used, applying a gradient from 1% to 24% B in 22 min, followed by an increase to 42% B in 11 min and to 95% B in 6 min. Re-equilibration was performed with 1% B for 16 min. Full scans were acquired for a mass range of 375-1,700 m/z with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3e6 ions with a max. ion time (IT) of 60 ms. MS/MS analyses were generally performed on the top12 most intensive multiply charged peptide ions applying higher collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with an energy of 28 and an exclusion time of 45 s. The resolution for MS/MS scans was 35,000, the AGC 1e5 with a max. IT of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using Mascot version 2.6.1 [PMID 10612281] and MS Amanda version 2.0.0.9695 [PMID 24909410]. The search was conducted using SearchGUI version [3.3.17] [PMID  21337703]. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy [PMID 20013364] version of the Homo sapiens complement of the UniProtKB (version of 04/2019; 95,916 target sequences). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: trypsin, specific, with a maximum of 4 missed cleavages; thermolysin, unspecific; both with 5 ppm as MS1 and 0.5 Da as MS2 tolerances. Fixed modifications were set to: carbamidomethylation of C; variable modifications to: acetylation of protein N-term, phosphorylation of S and T, oxidation of M. All algorithm-specific settings are listed in the Certificate of Analysis available in the supplementary information. Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.44 [PMID 25574629]. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Post-translational modification localizations were scored using the D-score [PMID 23307401] and the phosphoRS score [PMID 22073976] with a threshold of 95 as implemented in the compomics-utilities package [PMID 21385435]. A phosphoRS score > 95 was considered as a confident site localization.

### Publication Abstract
Peroxisomes and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) cooperate in cellular lipid metabolism. They form membrane contacts through interaction of the peroxisomal membrane protein ACBD5 (acyl-coenzyme A-binding domain protein 5) and the ER-resident protein VAPB (vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B). ACBD5 binds to the major sperm protein domain of VAPB via its FFAT-like (two phenylalanines [FF] in an acidic tract) motif. However, molecular mechanisms, which regulate formation of these membrane contact sites, are unknown. Here, we reveal that peroxisome-ER associations via the ACBD5-VAPB tether are regulated by phosphorylation. We show that ACBD5-VAPB binding is phosphatase-sensitive and identify phosphorylation sites in the flanking regions and core of the FFAT-like motif, which alter interaction with VAPB-and thus peroxisome-ER contact sites-differently. Moreover, we demonstrate that GSK3&#x3b2; (glycogen synthase kinase-3 &#x3b2;) regulates this interaction. Our findings reveal for the first time a molecular mechanism for the regulation of peroxisome-ER contacts in mammalian cells and expand the current model of FFAT motifs and VAP interaction.

### Keywords
Cos7 cells, Phosphorylation, Acbd5

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


