### Accession
PXD039719

### Title
EED and IgG (as control) co-immunoprecipitation of wild type embryonic stem cells (ESCs), with 3 biological replicates per condition.

### Description
DNA and Histone-3 Lysine 27 methylation typically function as repressive modifications and operate within distinct genomic compartments.  In mammals, the majority of the genome is kept in a DNA methylated state, whereas the Polycomb Repressive Complexes regulate the unmethylated CpG-rich promoters of developmental genes. In contrast to this general framework, the extraembryonic lineages display non-canonical, globally intermediate DNA methylation levels that includes disruption of local Polycomb domains. To better understand this unusual landscape’s molecular properties, we genetically and chemically perturbed major epigenetic pathways in mouse Trophoblast Stem Cells (TSCs). We find that the extraembryonic epigenome reflects ongoing and dynamic de novo methyltransferase recruitment, which is continuously antagonized by Polycomb to maintain intermediate, locally disordered methylation. Despite its disorganized molecular appearance, our data point to a highly controlled equilibrium between counteracting repressors within extraembryonic cells, one that can seemingly persist indefinitely without bistable features typically seen for embryonic forms of epigenetic regulation.

### Sample Protocol
EED and control IgG immunoprecipitations were carried out using whole-cell lysates prepared from wildtype ES and TS cells.  Immune complexes were prepared for downstream mass spectrometry analysis using the Pierce MS-Compatible Magnetic IP Kit. This was followed by a tryptic digest including reduction and alkylation of the cysteines with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and chloroacetamide, respectively.   Then, proteins were digested with trypsin and acidified by adding with formic acid and placed on the magnetic rack. The supernatants, containing the digested peptides, were transferred to a new low-protein binding tube, desalted, lyophilized and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid in water, prior injection to nano-LC-MS/MS. Digested IP samples were loaded onto Evotips Pure tips according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Peptide separation was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Evosep One) using the Endurance column with the 30 samples a day method. The LC system was coupled to a timsTOF SCP mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) applying the data-independent acquisition (DIA) with parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) method.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed with Dia-NN (v1.8.1) and searched against an in silico predicted mouse spectra library. The “match between run” feature was used. A t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction was performed by Perseus (v2.0.3.1) on normalized protein values to identify significant regulations between KO and controls.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eed, Polycomb, Epigenetic regulation, Mouse embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Department of Genome Regulation, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics; Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Meissner
Department of Genome Regulation, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics; Berlin, Germany


