### Accession
PXD020700

### Title
15N Stable-isotope-labeling in Arabidopsis (SILIA) quantitative MS analysis of the AtACINUS interactome

### Description
AtACINUS protein is involved in regulation of alternative transcription and splicing(AS). Identifying interaction partners and protein complex compositions for AtACINUS can produce valuable information on the mechanisms by which they regulate transcription and AS, as well as post-translational modifications on AtACINUS. A homozygous 35S::AtACINUS-GFP/acinus-2 plant was selected for similar protein expression level to the endogenous AtACINUS protein of wild-type plants using a native α-AtACINUS antibody. We isolated putative AtACINUS interaction partners from young Arabidopsis seedlings using the native α-AtACINUS antibody. Plants expressing TAP-GFP under 35S promoter were used as controls.

### Sample Protocol
The WT and acinus-2 plants were grown for two weeks at 21°C with 24 hours light on vertical 14N or 15N medium plates (Hogland’s No2 salt mixture without nitrogen 1.34g/L, 6g/L phytoblend, 2 µmol/L  propiconazole, and 1g/L KNO3 or 1g/L K15NO3 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories)  for 14N medium or 15N medium, respectively, pH5.8). About 5 g of tissue was harvested for each sample, ground in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80°C. Immunoprecipitation was performed as described previously with slight modifications (Ni et al., 2013). Briefly, proteins were extracted in 10 mL MOPS buffer (100 mmol/L MOPS, pH 7.6, 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1% (v/v) TritonX-100, 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride (PMSF), 2X Complete protease inhibitor cocktail, and PhosStop cocktail (Roche)), centrifuged, and ﬁltered through two layers of Miracloth. The flow through was incubated with 20 µg anti-AtACINUS antibody for one hour at 4 °C, then 50 µL protein A agarose beads were added and incubated for another hour, followed by four 2-min washes with immunoprecipitation buffer. At the last wash, 14N-labeled Wild-type and 15N-labeld acinus-2 IP samples or reciprocal 15N-labeled Wild-type and 14N-labeled acinus-2 IP samples were mixed, and eluted with 2x SDS buffer. The eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. After Coomassie Brillant blue staining, the whole lane of protein samples was excised in ten segments and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. The peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and analyzed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), equipped with a NanoAcquity liquid chromatography system (Waters). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping column (NanoAcquity UPLC 180 µm X 20 mm; Waters) and then washed with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The analytical column was a BEH130 C18 100 µm X 100 mm (Waters). The flow rate was 600 nL/min. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 2-30% solvent B (100% (v/v) acetonitrile/ 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 34 min, followed by a short wash at 50% solvent B. After a precursor scan was measured in the Orbitrap by scanning from mass-to-charge ratio 350 to 1500, the six most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry peak lists were extracted using an in-house script PAVA, and data were searched using Protein Prospector against the same TAIR database (TAIR10), to which reverse sequence versions were concatenated (a total of 35,386 entries) to allow estimation of a false discovery rate (FDR). Carbamidomethylcysteine was searched as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Data were searched with a 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ion and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Peptide and protein FDRs were set as 0.01 and 0.05. 15N labeled amino acids were also searched as a fixed modification for 15N data. 15N labeling efficiency was calculated as about 96%, by manually comparing experimental peak envelop data of the 15N labeled peptide from top 10 proteins in the raw data to theoretical isotope distributions using Software Protein-prospector (MS-Isotope app). Quantification was done using Protein Prospector which automatically adjusts the L/H ratio with labeling efficiency. The SILIA ratio (WT/acinus-2) was normalized using the average ratios of non-specific interactor ribosomal proteins (with more than five peptides). 15N labeling samples in general have less identification rates of proteins because of 96% labeling efficiency.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Atacinus, Plant, Seedling, Co-immunoprecipitation, 15n stable-isotope-labeling in arabidopsis(silia), Ip-ms, Lc-ms/ms, Acinus

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr SHOULING XU
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility


