### Accession
PXD020217

### Title
Human Tear using MALDI-TOF-MS for Dry Eye syndrome

### Description
Tears are a biological fluid that has diagnostic potential for ocular diseases. Extracellular vesicles (EVs), wildly detected in various biofluids including tears, are nanoparticles released by living cells and considered as promising detection sources for non-invasive liquid biopsy. Understanding the roles of tears and tear-EVs in ocular diseases such as dry eye can facilitate the studies of clinical diagnosis, which usually entails detecting such liquid objects with a rapid and effective method. In this study, we utilized a mass spectrometry based strategy to analyze peptidome/proteome profiles of tear and EVs for rapid dry eye diagnosis. Nano-sized EVs were isolated from tears of either healthy control (HC) individuals or dry eye syndrome (DES) patients, and the tear compositions were further analyzed by tracking their fingerprints with matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization/time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS). The fingerprints of tear-EVs could be observed in a dose-dependent manner as well as tears, allowing comparing their discriminant peaks between tears and EVs. By analyzing these peaks, the fingerprints of both tear and tear-EVs were showed to have a capability of distinguishing DES patients from HC donors, and providing an efficient way for screening potential DES biomarkers. The proposed tear and EV fingerprinting approach is expected to be a potential tool in rapid diagnosis of ocular disease and in-depth researches of pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Tear fluid mixture was eluted from Schirmer strips into PBS (5 mL; pooling of 2.5 mL PBS containing a 30 mm Schirmer strip from each eye) was centrifuged at 200 g for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 3,000 g for 10 min to remove cells and other impurities. The sample was filtered through a 0.22 µm filter to remove debris. The processed tear fluid was used in the microfluidic device isolation. After isolation, the concentrated and purified EVs are collected for the mass spectra analysis. MALDI-TOF-MS targets were prepared by spotting 0.5 µL of each purified sample on a Ground Steel Chip 600/384 TF plate, along with a 0.8 µL drop of MALDI matrix solution (alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (HCCA) matrix (0.3 mg/mL in ethanol: acetone (2:1) solution)). After drying, the samples were analyzed using an Autoflex max TOF/TOF with FlexControl 3.0 (Bruker Daltonics, Autflex, Leipzig, Germany) operated in linear mode geometry. Sample spots were irradiated with a pulsed laser (360 nm, 120 ns) for desorption and ionization. 5000 shots were fired per spot and averaged to obtain representative mass spectra. Positive-ion mass spectra acquired in linear mode was collected at an acceleration voltage of 20 kV, with calibration of the MALDI mass spectra performed using Protein Calibration Standard I (Bruker Daltonics) as standards.

### Data Protocol
The built-in mathematical model’s Genetic algorithm (GA) and neural network algorithm (SNN) were used to select each peptide peak and classification models were setup using ClinProTools 3.0 software to determine the optimal separation planes between samples from the two training groups.

### Publication Abstract
The tear is a biological fluid that has the diagnostic potential for ocular diseases. Extracellular vesicles (EVs), widly detected in various biofluids including tears, are nanoparticles released by living cells and considered as promising detection sources for noninvasive liquid biopsy. Understanding the roles of tears and tear-EVs in ocular diseases such as dry eye can facilitate the studies of clinical diagnosis, which usually entails detecting such liquid objects with a rapid and effective method. In this study, we used a mass spectrometry-based strategy to analyze peptidome/proteome profiles of tears and EVs for rapid dry eye diagnosis. Nanosized EVs were isolated from tears of both healthy control (HC) individuals and dry eye syndrome (DES) patients, and the tear compositions were further analyzed by tracking their fingerprints with matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization/time-of-flight mass spectrometry. The fingerprints of tear-EVs could be observed in a dose-dependent manner and tears, allowing for comparison of the discriminant peaks between tears and EVs. By analyzing these peaks, the fingerprints of both tear and tear-EVs were showed to have the capability of distinguishing patients with DES from HC donors and providing an efficient way for screening potential DES biomarkers. The proposed tear and EV fingerprinting approach is expected to be a potential tool in the rapid diagnosis of ocular diseases and in-depth research on pathogenesis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020217.

### Keywords
Human, Dry eye syndrome, Maldi-tof ms, Tear, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Wenzhou Medical University

### Submitter
Ting Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Fei Liu
Wenzhou Medical University


