### Accession
PXD025732

### Title
Absolute proteome quantification in the gas-fermenting acetogen Clostridium autoethanogenum

### Description
Microbes that can recycle one-carbon (C1) greenhouse gases into fuels and chemicals are vital for the biosustainability of future industries. Acetogens are the most efficient known microbes for fixing carbon oxides CO2 and CO. Understanding proteome allocation is important for metabolic engineering as it dictates metabolic fitness. Here, we use absolute proteomics to quantify intracellular concentrations for >1,000 proteins in the model-acetogen Clostridium autoethanogenum grown on three gas mixtures. We detect prioritisation of proteome allocation for C1 fixation and significant expression of proteins involved in the production of acetate and ethanol as well as proteins with unclear functions. The data also revealed which isoenzymes are important. Integration of proteomic and metabolic flux data demonstrated that enzymes catalyse high fluxes with high concentrations and high in vivo catalytic rates. We show that flux throughput was dominantly controlled through enzyme catalytic rates rather than concentrations. Our work serves as a reference dataset and advances systems-level understanding and engineering of acetogens.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation C. autoethanogenum cultures were sampled for proteomics by immediate pelleting of 2 mL of culture using centrifugation (25,000 × g for 1 min at 4 °C) and stored at -80 °C until analysis. Details of protein extraction and protein quantification in cell lysates are described previously (Valgepea et al. 2018; DOI:10.1186/s13068-018-1052-9). In short, thawed cell pellets were suspended in lysis buffer (containing SDS, DTT, and Trizma® base) and cell lysis was performed using glass beads and repeating a ‘lysis cycle’ consisting of heating, bead beating, centrifugation, and vortexing before protein quantification using the 2D Quant Kit.  Sample preparation and protein digestion for MS analysis was based on the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al. 2008; DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.1322). The following starting material was loaded onto an Amicon® Ultra-0.5 mL centrifugal filter unit (nominal molecular weight cut-off of 30,000): 1) 50 µg of protein for one culture sample from each gas mixture (CO, syngas, or high-H2 CO) for building the spectral library for DIA MS data analysis (samples 1-3); 2) 7 µg of protein for one culture sample from either syngas or high-H2 CO plus ‘sample spike-in standard mix’ for including spike-in SIL-protein data to the spectral library (samples 4-5); 3) 15 µg of protein for all 12 culture samples (biological quadruplicates from CO, syngas, and high-H2 CO) plus ‘sample spike-in standard mix’ for performing absolute proteome quantification in C. autoethanogenum (samples 6-17); 4) ten dilution series samples with 10-15 µg of total protein (C. autoethanogenum cell lysate background plus ‘dilution series spike-in standard mix’) for performing the dilution series experiment for the 19 spike-in SIL-proteins (see above) (samples 18-27).  Samples containing SIL-proteins (samples 4-27) were incubated at 37 °C for 1 h to reduce SIL-protein disulphide bonds (cell lysate contained DTT). Details of the FASP workflow are described before (Valgepea et al. 2018; DOI:10.1186/s13068-018-1052-9). 50 µL of samples 1-3 were withdrawn and pooled for performing high pH reverse-phase fractionation as described previously (Valgepea et al. 2018; DOI:10.1186/s13068-018-1052-9) for expanding the spectral library for DIA MS data analysis, yielding eight fractions (samples 28-35). Subsequently, all samples were vacuum-centrifuged at 30 °C until dryness followed by reconstitution of samples 1-3 and 4-35 in 51 and 13 µL of 0.1% FA in 5% ACN, respectively. Finally, total peptide concentration in each sample was determined using the PierceTM Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide to ensure that the same total peptide amount across samples 1-17 and 28-35 (excluding samples 18-27, see below) could be injected for DIA MS analysis. LC method for data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and DIA MS Details of the LC method employed for generating the spectral library using DDA and for DIA sample runs are described previously (Mahamkali et al. 2020; DOI:10.1073/pnas.1919531117). In short, a Thermo Fisher Scientific UHPLC system including C18 trap and separation columns was used to elute peptides with a gradient and total elution time of 110 min. For each DDA and DIA sample run, 1 µg of peptide material from protein digestion was injected, except for dilution series samples (samples 18-27 above) that were injected in a constant volume of 3 µL to maintain the dilution levels of the ‘dilution series spike-in standard mix’. DDA MS spectral library generation The following 13 samples were analysed on the Q-Exactive HF-X in DDA mode to yield the spectral library for DIA MS data analysis: 1) three replicates of one culture sample from each gas mixture (CO, syngas, or high-H2 CO) (samples 1-3 above); 2) three replicates of one culture sample from either syngas or high-H2 CO plus ‘sample spike-in standard mix’ (samples 4-5); 3) eight high pH reverse-phase fractions of a pool of samples from each gas mixture (samples 28-35). Details of DDA MS acquisition for generating the spectral library are described before (Mahamkali et al. 2020; DOI:10.1073/pnas.1919531117). In short, eluted peptides from the C18 column were introduced to the MS via a nano-ESI and analysed using the Q-Exactive HF-X with an Orbitrap mass analyser.  DIA MS data acquisition Details of DIA MS acquisition are described before (Mahamkali et al. 2020; DOI:10.1073/pnas.1919531117). In short, as for DDA MS acquisition, eluted peptides were introduced to the MS via a nano-ESI and analysed using the Q-Exactive HF-X with an Orbitrap mass analyser. DIA was achieved using an inclusion list: m/z 395‒1100 in steps of 15 amu and scans cycled through the list of 48 isolation windows with a loop count of 48. In total, DIA MS data was acquired for 22 samples (samples 6-27 defined in section Sample preparation).

### Data Protocol
DIA MS data analysis was performed with Skyline (Gillet et al. 2012; DOI:10.1074/mcp.O111.016717) as described before (Valgepea et al. 2018; DOI:10.1186/s13068-018-1052-9) with the following modifications: 1) 12 manually picked high confidence endogenous peptides present in all samples and spanning the elution gradient were used for iRT alignment through building an RT predictor; 2) outlier peptides from iRT regression were removed; 3) a minimum of three isotope peaks were required for a precursor; 4) single peptide per spike-in SIL-protein was allowed for anchor protein absolute quantification while at least two peptides per protein were required for label-free estimation of proteome-wide protein concentrations; 5) extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) were transformed using Savitszky-Golay smoothing. Briefly, the .pd result file from Proteome Discoverer was used to build the DIA MS spectral library and the mProphet peak picking algorithm (Reiter et al. 2011; DOI:10.1038/nmeth.1584) within Skyline was used to separate true from false positive peak groups (per sample) and only peak groups with q-value<0.01 (representing 1% FDR) were used for further quantification. We confidently quantitated 7,288 peptides and 1,243 proteins across all samples and 4,887 peptides and 1,043 proteins on average within each sample for estimating proteome-wide absolute protein concentrations. For absolute quantification of anchor protein concentrations, we additionally manually: 1) removed integration of peaks showing non-Gaussian shapes or interference from other peaks; 2) removed precursors with similarity measures of R2<0.9 between product peak areas and corresponding intensities in the spectral library (dotp in Skyline), precursor peak areas and expected isotope distribution (idotp), or heavy and light peak areas (rdotp). After analysis in Skyline, 17 spike-in SIL-proteins remained for further analysis as protein CAETHG_RS14410 was not identified in DIA MS data while CAETHG_RS18395 did not pass quantification filters (Supplementary Table 1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Absolute quantification; acetogen; gas fermentation; data-independent acquisition; dia

### Affiliations
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, Australia
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology,The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Kaspar Valgepea

### Lab Head
Dr Esteban Marcellin
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, Australia


