### Accession
PXD017537

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of seminal plasma, sperm membrane proteins and seminal extracellular vesicles suggests vesicular mechanisms aid in the removal and addition of proteins to the ram sperm membrane.

### Description
Quantitative proteomic studies are contributing greatly to our understanding of the spermatozoon through the provision of detailed information on the proteins spermatozoa acquire and shed in the acquisition of fertility. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are thought to aid in the delivery of proteins to spermatozoa in the male reproductive tract. The aim of this study was to identify EV proteins isolated from ram seminal plasma. High-speed centrifugation using Optiprep sucrose gradients was used to purify two EV populations from seminal plasma. Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with quantitative SWATH was used to identify proteins enriched in the extracellular vesicle preparation (e.g. EDIL3) and those that were co-isolated with vesicular preparations due to their abundance or adhesive nature (e.g. BSPs). Ram sperm plasma membrane proteins were also isolated using nitrogen cavitation and identified with LC-MS/MS to better understand the interplay of proteins between the sperm membrane and extracellular environment. The categorisation of proteins enriched in the EV population (P<0.05, 2-fold increase compared to whole seminal plasma) according to their function revealed three main groupings: vesicle biogenesis, metabolism and membrane adhesion and remodelling. The latter group contained many reproduction-specific proteins that show demonstrable links to sperm fertility. Many of these membrane-bound proteins show testicular expression and are shed from the sperm surface during epididymal maturation (e.g. TEX101, LY6K). Their association with seminal EVs suggests that EVs may not only deliver protein cargo to spermatozoa but also assist in the removal of proteins from the sperm membrane.

### Sample Protocol
Sperm plasma membrane vesicles (PMVs), seminal plasma (SP) and extracellular vesicles (EVs) from Band 1 and Band 2 were processed with a FASP kit. Briefly, protein concentration was determined by Qubit protein assay and 50 µg of protein was SDS-solubilised (Tris 62.6 mM, 5% SDS, complete ultra mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablet, pH 6.8). The solubilised samples were reduced with 10 mM TCEP (1h, 37°C) and mixed with the UA buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa cut-off Microcon filter (Millipore, Watford, UK). The device was centrifuged at 14,000 × g at 20°C for 15 min. Successive washes and alkylation steps were performed. The washed concentrate was then subjected to proteolytic digestion in the absence of urea, using modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison,WI, USA). Tryptic peptides were eluted after digestion on the filter. The peptides were acidified (1% formic acid) and quantified (Qubit protein assay) and 1 µg aliquots vacuum dried prior to mass spectrometry.   Whole SP was used as the global standard for the generation of an ion spectral library. One µg/6 µL of seminal plasma protein was separated by nano-LC using an Eksigent 415 UHPLC system (Sciex) coupled to an in-house built fritless nano 75 μm (i.d.) × 20 cm column packed with ReproSil Pur 120 C18 stationary phase (1.9 μm particle size, Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). LC mobile phase buffers were comprised of A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and B: 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 5% to 40% B over 90 min and then 95% B wash over 1 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 350 – 1, 500 using a 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (Sciex, Foster City, USA). Up to 50 of the most abundant ions, with charge states between + 2 to + 5 were sequentially isolated and fragmented, and a product ion scan collected over 100 to 1800 m/z. Ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 20 seconds. One microgram of each sample was separated by nano-LC using the same 90 min gradient conditions described above. MS/MS runs were conducted using a 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (Ab Sciex, Foster City, USA) in data independent acquisition mode, using SWATH acquisition. A total of 34 windows at a width of 54 Da covered the mass range 300 – 1,500 Da. An overlap of 1 Da between each SWATH window was used. An accumulation time of 96 ms was used for each fragment ion scan and for the survey scans acquired at the beginning of each cycle, resulting in a total cycle time of 3.3 seconds. The rolling collision energy for each window was 2+. The mass spectrometer was operated in high sensitivity mode. Ten micrograms of plasma membrane vesicles were pooled, dried down and resuspended in 90% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were first fractionated using an Agilent 1200 HPLC system coupled to an in house built fritless TSK-Amide 80 HILIC 4.5 mm (i.d.) × 17 cm column (5 µm particle size). LC mobile phase buffers were comprised of A: 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and B: 90% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA. A total of 12 fractions were eluted into a V bottom 96 well polypropylene plate (Griener, Sigma Aldrich, Castle Hill, Australia) using 100% B for 26.5 min, followed by a linear gradient of 60- 30% B over 11 min and then 100% B wash over 2 min at a flow rate of 6 µL/min. The resultant fractions were dried down and resuspended in 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid ready for LC-MS/MS using the same 90 min gradient conditions described previously.

### Data Protocol
An ion spectral library was generated by searching raw results (.wiff format) of the global standard in Proteinpilot (v5.0, Sciex), using the Paragon search algorithm. Search parameters included iodoacetamide as an alkylating agent, trypsin as a protease, thorough ID search effort and a detected protein threshold of 0.05. A unique ion spectral library was produced by searching the global standard against an NCBI database for all mammals (downloaded August 2016), with enrichment for Ovis aries.  Identification of proteins was performed in the SWATH microapp within Peak View (v1.2.0.4; Sciex). The ion spectral library of interest was imported (.group format), excluding shared peptides. Retention time calibration was performed by selecting house-keeping proteins spaced equally along the 90 min gradient, with high intensity (> 2500) of the fragment ion, no modifications and a charge state of + 1. Samples were compared to the relevant ion spectral library using the following processing parameters; 5 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptide, 90% peptide confidence, exclusion of shared peptides, XIC extraction width 5 min and XIC width 0.1 Da. Protein values were considered significantly different if they met two conditions 1) a T-test of their mean values returned a significantly different (P < 0.05) result and 2) the fold-change of their mean values was 2 or greater.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomic studies are contributing greatly to the understanding of the spermatozoon through the provision of detailed information on the proteins spermatozoa acquire and shed in the acquisition of fertility. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are thought to aid in the delivery of proteins to spermatozoa in the male reproductive tract. The aim of this study is to isolate, identify and quantify EV proteins isolated from ram seminal plasma. Ram sperm plasma membrane proteins are also isolated using nitrogen cavitation and identified to better understand the interplay of proteins between the sperm membrane and extracellular environment. The categorization of proteins enriched in the EV population according to their function revealed three main groupings: vesicle biogenesis, metabolism, and membrane adhesion and remodeling. The latter group contains many reproduction-specific proteins that show demonstrable links to sperm fertility. Many of these membrane-bound proteins show testicular expression and are shed from the sperm surface during epididymal maturation (e.g., testis expressed 101; TEX101 and lymphocyte Antigen 6 Family Member K; LY6K). Their association with seminal EVs suggests that EVs may not only deliver protein cargo to spermatozoa but also assist in the removal of proteins from the sperm membrane.

### Keywords
Sperm surface, Edil3, Microvesicles, Prostasomes, Epididysomes

### Affiliations
University of Sydney
Colorado Center for Reproductive Medicine

### Submitter
Taylor Pini

### Lab Head
Dr Taylor Pini
Colorado Center for Reproductive Medicine


