### Accession
PXD017308

### Title
A divergent cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase complex controls progression through the atypical replicative cycles during Plasmodium berghei gametogony

### Description
Cell-cycle transitions are generally triggered by variations in the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) bound to cyclins. Malaria-causing parasites have evolved unique cell-cycles with a repertoire of ancestral CDKs and cyclins whose functions and interdependency remain elusive. Here, we show that the divergent Plasmodium berghei CDK-related kinase 5 (CRK5), is a critical cell-cycle regulator of gametogony required for transmission to the mosquito. It phosphorylates canonical CDK motifs on components of the pre-replicative complex and is essential for DNA replication. We also provide evidence for indirect regulation of the concomitant progression through M-phase. Over a replicative cycle, CRK5 stably interacts with a single Plasmodium-specific cyclin (SOC2) with no evidence of SOC2 cycling through transcription, translation nor degradation. Our results present evidence that during Plasmodium gametogony, a unique and divergent cyclin/CDK pair evolved to fulfil the functional space of multiple eukaryotic cell-cycle kinases controlling S-phase entry and progression through M-phase.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitations of proteins were performed with purified gametocytes. For HA IPs, samples were fixed for 10 minutes with 1% formaldehyde. Parasites were lysed in RIPA buffer and the supernatant was subjected to affinity purification with magnetics beads conjugated with anti-HA antibody (Sigma) or anti-GFP antibody (Invitrogen). Beads were re-suspended in 6 M urea and on-beads protein digestion was performed overnight with trypsin. After sample clean-up, LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed either on a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data-dependant analysis (DDA) was performed on the Q-Exactive Plus with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 70’000 FWHM followed by MS2 scans on up to 15 selected precusors. Data-dependant analysis (DDA) was performed on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 120’000 FWHM followed by as many subsequent MS2 scans on selected precursors as possible within 3 second maximum cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (MGF file format) were generated from raw data using the MS Convert conversion tool from ProteoWizard. The peaklist files were searched against the PlasmoDB_PbergheiANKA database (PlasmoDB.org, release 38, 5076 entries) combined with an in-house database of common contaminant using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da for QEx data and to 0.6 for Lumos data. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine and deaminated (NQ) as well as phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine. Fixed amino acid modification was carbamidomethyl cysteine. The Mascot search was validated using Scaffold 4.8.4 (Proteome Software) with 1% of protein FDR and at least 2 unique peptide per protein with a 0.1% of peptide FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Cell cycle transitions are generally triggered by variation in the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) bound to cyclins. Malaria-causing parasites have a life cycle with unique cell-division cycles, and a repertoire of divergent CDKs and cyclins of poorly understood function and interdependency. We show that <i>Plasmodium berghei</i> CDK-related kinase 5 (CRK5), is a critical regulator of atypical mitosis in the gametogony and is required for mosquito transmission. It phosphorylates canonical CDK motifs of components in the pre-replicative complex and is essential for DNA replication. During a replicative cycle, CRK5 stably interacts with a single <i>Plasmodium</i>-specific cyclin (SOC2), although we obtained no evidence of SOC2 cycling by transcription, translation or degradation. Our results provide evidence that during <i>Plasmodium</i> male gametogony, this divergent cyclin/CDK pair fills the functional space of other eukaryotic cell-cycle kinases controlling DNA replication.

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei, Crk5, Co-ip, Soc2

### Affiliations
University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland
University of Geneva

### Submitter
alexandre Hainard

### Lab Head
Dr Mathieu Brochet
University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland


