### Accession
PXD003368

### Title
LC/MS -  Molecular characterization of S

### Description
Secreted extracellular vesicles play an important role in pathogen-host interactions. Increased knowledge of schistosome extracellular vesicles could provide insights into schistosome-host interactions and enable the development of novel intervention strategies to inhibit parasitic processes and lessen disease transmission. Here, we describe biochemical characterization of Schistosoma japonicum exosome-like vesicles (S. japonicum EVs).

### Sample Protocol
New Zealand rabbits were percutaneously infected with approximately 1,500 S. japonicum cercariae (Anhui isolate, China). Schistosomes at the liver stage were collected from rabbits infected with S. japonicum at 28 d post infection (dpi). Parasites were thoroughly washed with PBS and maintained in preheated RPMI-1640 culture medium containing 100 U of penicillin and 100 mg/mL of streptomycin. A total exosome isolation kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was used for exosome isolation according to the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modifications. nine of gel lanes were excised and each slice was divided into 3-mm sections. Gel slices were destained using 30 mM potassium ferricyanide/100 mM sodium thiosulfate (1:1 v/v) and washed with Milli-Q water. The spots were incubated in 0.2 M NH4HCO3 for 20 min and then lyophilized. The in-gel proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM DTT/ 100 mM NH4HCO3) for 30 min at 56 ℃, then alkylated with iodoacetamide (50 mM IAA/100 mMNH4HCO3) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Gel pieces were briefly rinsed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and ACN, respectively. Finally, in gel digestion was performed by adding 40 μL modified porcine trypsin solution (Promega, Madison, USA) at 12.5 ng/ml trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3 followed by overnight incubation at 37 ℃. Protein samples were digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 ℃. Peptides were extracted.the EttanTM MDLC controlled by UNICORNTM software (GE Healthcare), a system for automated multi-dimensional chromatography was used for desalting and separation of peptides prior to on-line LTQ Velos (Thermo Scientific) analyses. In this system, peptide mixtures were desalted on RP trap columns (Zorbax 300 SB C18, Agilent Technologies), and then separated on a C18-reversed phase column (0.15 mm × 150 mm, Column Technology Inc. Fremont, CA). Mobile phases A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) and the mobile phases B (0.1% Formic acid in 84% acetonitrile) were selected. Tryptic peptide mixtures were loaded onto the columns, and separation was done at a flow rate of 2 μL/min by using a linear gradient buffer B described above. LTQ Velos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a micro-spray interface was connected to the LC setup for eluted peptides detection. Data-dependent MS/MS spectra were obtained simultaneously. Each scan cycle consisted of one full scan mass spectrum (m/z 300-1800) followed by 20 MS/MS events of the most intense ions with the following dynamic exclusion settings: repeat count 2, repeat duration 30 s, exclusion duration 90 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were automatically searched against the Schistosoma database (described above) using the BioworksBrowser rev. 3.3 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.). Protein identification results were extracted from SEQUEST out files with BuildSummary. Peptides were constrained to be tryptic and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines were treated as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine residues were considered as variable modifications. The mass tolerance allowed for the precursor ions was 2.0 Da and fragment ions was 0.8 Da, respectively. The protein identification criteria were based on Delta CN (≥ 0.1) and cross-correlation scores (Xcorr, one charge≥1.9, two charges ≥ 2.2, three charges ≥ 3.75.

### Publication Abstract
Secreted extracellular vesicles play an important role in pathogen-host interactions. Increased knowledge of schistosome extracellular vesicles could provide insights into schistosome-host interactions and enable the development of novel intervention strategies to inhibit parasitic processes and lessen disease transmission. Here, we describe biochemical characterization of Schistosoma japonicum exosome-like vesicles (S. japonicum EVs). A total of 403 proteins were identified in S. japonicum EVs, and bioinformatics analyses indicated that these proteins were mainly involved in binding, catalytic activity, and translation regulatory activity. Next, we characterized the population of small RNAs associated with S. japonicum EVs. Further studies demonstrated that mammalian cells could internalize S. japonicum EVs and transfer their cargo miRNAs to recipient cells. Additionally, we found that a specific miRNA, likely originating from a final host, ocu-miR-191-5p, is also associated with S. japonicum EVs. Overall, our findings demonstrate that S. japonicum EVs could be implicated in the pathogenesis of schistosomiasis via a mechanism involving the transfer of their cargo miRNAs to hosts. Our findings provide novel insights into the mechanisms of schistosome-host interactions.

### Keywords
Lc/ms

### Affiliations
SHVRI CAAS
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Lihui Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Guofeng Cheng
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


