### Accession
PXD011786

### Title
MS for identifying CENP-E ubiquitination sites and MS for GST-Ub4 interacting proteins

### Description
LUBAC mediates the linear ubiquitination of CENP-E and facilitates the anchoring of CENP-E by KNL1 at attached kinetochores

### Sample Protocol
To isolate ubiquitinated CENP-E for MS analysis, HEK293T cells were transiently transfected with Flag-CENP-E (1-1360 aa), LUBAC and ubiquitin, then cells were synchronized into mitosis and then lysed. Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated by anti-Flag M2 affinity gel, and then Flag-CENP-E immunoprecipitants were eluted with 3× Flag peptide (F4799, Sigma-Aldrich) in elution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl) for 2 hours. The eluted samples were concentrated and buffer exchanged into 6M urea with ultra-centrifugal filter (Sartorius, 50k filter), and the sample were transferred into a PCR tube, sequentially reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 20 mM Chloroacetamide. Then the sample mixture were added to the ultra-centrifugal filter (Sartorius, 10k filter), concentrated and buffer exchanged into 50 mM NH4HCO3, and the concentrate were subjected to proteolytic digestion by incubating with 15 ng/μL trypsin overnight at 37°C in the filter. The tryptic peptides were collected as a filtrate. The remaining sample in the filter were added with 10 ng/μL trypsin again and incubated at 37°C for another 2 hours. All of the tryptic peptides were collected and lyophilized for MS analysis. Peptides were resuspended with 0.1% formic acid, and analyzed by an ultra-performance LC-MS/MS platform of Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with an easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). To identify GST-Ub4 binding proteins, chromosome isolation fraction of MG132-arrested metaphase HeLa cells was pulled down by GST-Ub4, protein samples were denatured and separated by SDS-PAGE gel then stained with Bio-Safe Coomassie (Bio-Rad). Targeted bands were cut down and digested with trypsin. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo) via a nano-electrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
For raw MS file from CENP-E ubiquitylation, raw file was searched against the human National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Refseq protein database in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 suited with Mascot software (version 2.3.1, Matrix Science) to achieve a false discovery rate of <1%. The mass tolerance was set to be 20 ppm for precursor, and it was set 50 mmu for the tolerance of product ions. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein-N-term), GlyGly (K) were chosen as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. For raw MS file from GST-Ub4 binding proteins, raw file was searched against the human National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Refseq protein database in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 suited with Mascot software (version 2.3.1, Matrix Science) to achieve a false discovery rate of <1%. The mass tolerance was set to be 20 ppm for precursor, and it was set 0.5 Da for the tolerance of product ions. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein-N-term), Phospho (Y), Phospho (ST) and DeStreak (C) were chosen as variable modifications; and up to two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion.

### Publication Abstract
Faithful chromosome segregation requires proper chromosome congression at prometaphase and dynamic maintenance of the aligned chromosomes at metaphase. Chromosome missegregation can result in aneuploidy, birth defects and cancer. The kinetochore-bound KMN network and the kinesin motor CENP-E are critical for kinetochore-microtubule attachment and chromosome stability. The linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex (LUBAC) attaches linear ubiquitin chains to substrates, with well-established roles in immune response. Here, we identify LUBAC as a key player of chromosome alignment during mitosis. LUBAC catalyzes linear ubiquitination of the kinetochore motor CENP-E, which is specifically required for the localization of CENP-E at attached kinetochores, but not unattached ones. KNL1 acts as a receptor of linear ubiquitin chains to anchor CENP-E at attached kinetochores in prometaphase and metaphase. Thus, linear ubiquitination promotes chromosome congression and dynamic chromosome alignment by coupling the dynamic kinetochore microtubule receptor CENP-E to the static one, the KMN network.

### Keywords
Cenp-e, Knl1

### Affiliations
National Center of Biomedical Analysis

### Submitter
Yan Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Huiyan Li
National Center of Biomedical Analysis


