### Accession
PXD037021

### Title
Tear proteome revealed association of S100A family proteins and mesothelin with thrombosis in elderly patients with retinal vein occlusion

### Description
Tear samples collected from patients with central retinal vein occlusion (n=58) and group of healthy volunteers (n=30) were analyzed using a proteomic label-free absolute quantitative ap-proach. We found a large proportion (458 proteins with a frequency > 0.6) of tear proteome shared between healthy donors and subjects with the central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO). Comparative proteomic analysis revealed 29 proteins (p<0.05) significantly differed in their quantitative property between CRVO patients and the control group. Among them S100A6 (log (2)FC = 1.11, p<0.001), S100A8 (log(2)FC = 2.45, p<0.001), and S100A9 (log2(FC) = 2.08, p<0.001) are the most abundantly represented upregulated proteins, and β2-microglobulin was the most downregulated protein (log2(FC) = -2.13, p<0.001). Mesothelin (MSLN) was found as a protein with a significant increase (log2(FC) = 0.82, p<0.001) in the CRVO group. The selected up- and downregulated pro-teins were assembled to customize map of the CRVO-related critical protein interactions with quantitative properties. The customized map (FDR<0.01) emerged inflammation, impairment of retinal hemostasis, and immune response as the main set of processes associated with CRVO is-chemic condition. The semantic analysis encouraged the prevalence of core biological processes encompassing dysregulation of mitochondrial organization and regulation of improperly or utilization of topologically incorrect folded proteins as a consequence of oxidative stress and in-flammation escalating the ischemic condition caused by the local retinal hemostasis dysregulation. The most significantly different proteins (S100A6, S100A8, S100A9, MSLN, and β2-microglobulin) were applied for the ROC plotting and their AUC varied from 0.772 to 0.952 suggesting association with the CRVO.

### Sample Protocol
• The tear sample in a volume of 30 µL was mixed with 120 µL of methanol (J. T. Baker; the Netherlands) for proteins precipitation and centrifuged at 17,500×g acceleration at 15oC for 10 minutes (Centrifuge 5424R, Eppendorf, Germany). The supernatant was dis-carded and the obtained precipitate was dissolved in 15 µL of the denaturation solution consisted of 1% deoxycholic acid sodium salt (Sigma, Italy), 5 M urea (Sigma, Italy), 6% acetonitrile (Carlo Erba, France), 300 mM sodium chloride (Fluka-Honeywell, Germany) buffered by 75 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate to pH~8.5 (Sigma, Switzerland) and supplied with freshly prepared 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) for proteins reduction. Samples were incubated for 20 min at 45oC under continual stirring. Alkylation was supplied by the 2% solution of 4-vinylpyridine (Aldrich, the UK) in 30% isopropanol (Fisher Chemical, the UK) added to 0.2% of the final concentration and incubated for 20 minutes at ambient temperature in darkness. Following alkylation, the sample was diluted ten times with triethylammonium bicarbonate 50 mM (pH 8.2). In-solution digestion with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) resuspended to 200 ng/µL in 30 mM acetic acid (Carlo Erba, France) was performed in two consequent steps at a 1:50 (w/w) ratio for 3 h at 37oC and at a 1:200 (w/w) ratio for 3 hours at 42oC. When digestion was completed, the reaction was quenched with 50% formic acid (Fisher Chemical, the UK) added to a 2% final concentration. Samples were centrifuged at 12,500×g for 10 minutes at 10oC to sediment insoluble deoxycholic acid. Ethylacetate (Carlo Erba, France) in a volume of 100 µL was added to clean the supernatant from deoxycholic acid remnants, shacked vigorously, and centrifuged at 12,500×g for 10 minutes at 10oC again. The obtained clean supernatant was dried under a vacuum at 30oC for 30-40 minutes, and the resulting pellet was reconstituted in 15 µL of 0.5% formic acid to obtain 1 µg/µL as the final estimated concentration of peptides considering initial aligned concentration of total protein fraction before samples preparation. A Proteomics Dynamic Range Standard Set, or UPS-2 (Merck; St. Louis, MO, USA), that contains 48 proteins in a known concentration range covering five orders of magnitude has been used for the quantitative purpose to estimate proteins concentration in the study cohort samples. Because the collected proteins (including recombinant) in the UPS-2 are preferably originated from human genome, there is a risk of inaccurate and incorrect estimation of proteins concentration in tear sample. Therefore, the calibrating sample (UPS-2) was composed separately in a non-human matrix (E. coli strain K12) as described earlier and treated in the same manner as described above for tear samples. The calibrating sample was finally prepared in 10 µL to align the final concentration comparable with tear samples.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using PLGS (Protein Lynx Global Server, version 3.0.3, Waters, the UK) search engine against human protein amino acid sequences database obtained from UniProt KB (release May 2021) as a FASTA file enriched by the sequence of recombinant BH3-interacting domain death agonist from the UPS-2 (the FASTA of UPS-2 set proteins is available on http://www.sigma.com/ups). The search was performed at a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm (±10 ppm tolerance window) and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.008 Da (±4 mDa tolerance window). Searching included S-pyridilethylation as a fixed modification, and oxidized methionine and Q/N deamidation as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was fixed to at least eight amino acid residues, and only one internal missed cleavage was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) at 1% was determined.  The quantitative measurement has been performed by applying the Creatine kinase M-type (P06732) and BH3-interacting domain death agonist (P55957) included in the UPS-2 set at 50 fmoles/µL and 5 fmoles/µL in the final calibrating UPS-2 sample of 10 µL volume, respectively, The quantitative analysis was performed in the PLGS environment and based on the combination of the UPS-2-based calibration and matched peptides sum intensity as one of the reliable approaches for the label-free quantitation in samples with comparative narrow (up to five orders of magnitude) range of concentrations. Acceptance criteria for the protein identification were based on the Human Proteome Project Mass Spectrometry Data Interpretation Guidelines 3.0 but were applied in more flexible manner. At least two distinct by sequence peptides of which one must be unique (proteotypic) peptide (apart of isoform-specific peptides) were accepted for regular proteins identification. A fraction of criteria-met proteins was extracted for the statistical analysis following the proteins identification. Group-specific proteomes were assessed for similarity and the shared part of proteome was extracted for the principal component analysis (PCA) with multivariant t-distribution and 0.95 ellipse area confidence level. Protein intensity was estimated as the normalized summed peptide intensities belonged to the certain protein and the resulting matrix of intensities was used for the quantification based on the calculation of intensity medians for each protein within studied groups. Wilcoxon test (p < 0.05) with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple hypothesis testing was applied to groups of study to revealed outliers and significant differences in a quantitative loading. Proteins with no concentration measure were imputated and not considered for estimation of between-groups difference. Proteins with a frequency of at least 0.6 within a group of study, and beyond the fold changes cut-off >2 or <0.5 at a p-value less than 0.05 were considered as significant in quantitative property. Statistical values were calculated in the R (version 3.2.0) environment. Significantly altered proteins were submitted for the functional and pathways analysis at a q-value threshold less than q < 0.01 using the Cytoscape (version 3.8.2) software. Pathways and network reconstruction were performed using STRING (version 11.5) database query in the disease-related mode with a confidence score of 0.7 by employing the retinal vein occlusion-related proteins open access network as a source for the network customization and reconstruction. Both, customized after proteins identification and disease-related (CRVO) networks we gathered to consolidate the final reconstruction of CRVO-associated interactions. The consolidated network was enriched by quantitative properties of identified proteins and repopulated in the Cytoscape by applying the FDR<0.01 percolation filter. Proteins enriched by the GO terms of biological processes (GO database release of September 2021) were rendered with a similarity coefficient of more than 0.7 to refine the proteins interaction network. Tissue filters option of the Cytoscape was applied to group relevant proteins in disease-related reconstructed network by their tissue representation, which is estimated based on the transcriptomic, antibody and proteomic data collected by the STRING. Analysis of biological processes direction and elimination of redundant GO-terms attributed to the enriched protein was performed in support with REVIGO (GO database update of July 02, 2021; UniProt-to-GO mapping database update of July 17, 2021) at a p <0.001 and Resnik’s semantic similarity approach, which measures similarity between two terms as simply the information content of their most informative common ancestor. Area under the curve (AUC) using a ROC operator was plotted for the most significantly altered proteins taken from the studied group and associated with the CRVO to determine the meaningfulness of proteins specificity and sensitivity to certain pathology.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Retinal vein occlusion; retinal hemostasis; s100a protein; mesothelin; inflammation

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, 119121 Moscow, 10 Pogodinskaya str., bld. 8, Russian Federation; tel.: +7 495 246 16 41; web: www.ibmc.msk.ru

### Submitter
Arthur Kopylov

### Lab Head
Dr Anna L. Kaysheva
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, 119121 Moscow, 10 Pogodinskaya str., bld. 8, Russian Federation; tel.: +7 495 246 16 41; web: www.ibmc.msk.ru


