### Accession
PXD017700

### Title
Label-free based Proteomic analysis of secreted proteins from Mycoplasma bovis HB0801 and its attenuated strain P150

### Description
This study was aimed to perform a comparative analysis on potential secretory proteins between high (HB0801) and low (P150) virulent M.bovis strains. We employed the liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based label-free quantitative proteomic technology to identify and characterize the differential secretome profiles for two M.bovis strains. A total of 477 secretory proteins were identified in both two strains and 165 deferentially expressed in HB0801 over 1.5-folds higher than P150.

### Sample Protocol
About 100 μg of each sample preparation of secretory products was mixed with 10 mM DTT at boiling water bath for 5 min, and then incubated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature. Subsequently, digestion was performed by adding 40 μL trypsin buffer. A RP trap column (C18 Cartridge, Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE) was used for desalting of samples. After digestion, the samples were added with 40 μl 0.1% formic acid,  lyophilized under vacuum. Peptide mixtures of each sample were used for protein identification by nano-LC-MS/MS system, which consisted of a nano-HPLC system (EASY-nLc1000) and a linear trap quadruple mass spectrometer. Mobile phase A consisted of HPLC-grade water containing 0.1% formic acid (FA), and phase B consisted of 84% HPLC-grade acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% FA. The analytical separation was run at a flow rate of 400 nL/min using a linear gradient of phase B For MS survey scans, each scan cycle consisted of one full MS scan, and 20 MS2 scan of peptide fragments were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.3.05) against Mbov_HB0801 (P17188_HB0801_amino_acids_762_20170502.fasta, total sequence:762, Self-built Database). The search parameters included a trypsin digestion, two missed cleavages of trypsin and an error of 6 ppm or 20 ppm was allowed for full MS or MS/MS spectra study, respectively. Furthermore, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas the oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminal ends of proteins were specified as a variable modification. For protein quantification, razor and unique peptides were used. False discovery rate (FDR) of proteins and peptides was calculated and required for ≤0.01. The final step was to automatically match peptide within a mass and time tolerance window (0.5 Da and 2 min, respectively).

### Publication Abstract
Mycoplasmas are successful pathogens both in humans as well as in animals. In cattle, <i>Mycoplasma bovis</i> (<i>M. bovis</i>) is known to be responsible for serious health complications, including pneumonia, mastitis, and arthritis. However, <i>M. bovis</i> pathogenesis remains unclear. Secreted proteins of <i>M. bovis</i> could influence infection and modify host defense signaling pathways after they enter their extracellular space in the host micro-environment. Therefore, this study was aimed to compare the secretomes of <i>M. bovis</i> HB0801 virulent (P1) and attenuated (P150) strains and identify potential pathogenesis-related secreted proteins and biomarkers. The cells of P1 and P150 strains were grown in pleuropneumonia-like organism medium to log phase and then transferred to phosphate-buffered saline for 2 h. Then, the supernatant was analyzed by using label-free quantitative proteomics, and 477 potential secreted proteins were identified. Combined with the bioinformatics prediction, we found that 178 proteins were commonly secreted by the P1 and P150 strains, and 49 of them were encoded by mycoplasmal core genes. Additionally, 79 proteins were found to have a different abundance between the P1 and P150 strains. Among these proteins, 34 were more abundant and uniquely expressed in P1, indicating a possible association with the virulence of <i>M. bovis</i>. Three differentially secreted proteins, MbovP0145, MbovP0725, and MbovP0174, as well as one equally secreted protein, MbovP0481, as positive control and one protein of inner membrane, MbovP0310, as negative control were, respectively, cloned, expressed, and evaluated for antigenicity, subcellular location, and the secretion nature with their mouse antisera by western blotting and colony immunoblotting assay. Among them, MbovP0145 was confirmed to be more secreted by P1 than P150 strain, highly reactive with the antisera from naturally infected and P1 experimentally infected cattle but not with the P150 vaccinated calves, indicating its potential as a diagnostic antigen. In conclusion, these findings may represent the most extensive compilation of potentially secreted proteins in mycoplasma species and the largest number of differentially secreted proteins between the virulent and attenuated <i>M. bovis</i> strains to date and provide new insights into <i>M. bovis</i> pathogenesis and diagnosis.

### Keywords
Label-free, Secreted proteins, Mycoplasma bovis

### Affiliations
Huazhong agricultural university

### Submitter
hui zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Aizhen Guo
Huazhong agricultural university


