### Accession
PXD039568

### Title
The effect of obesity on uterine receptivity is mediated by endometrial extracellular vesicles that control human endometrial stromal cell decidualization and trophoblast invasion

### Description
The objectives of the present study were to determine whether obesity impacts human decidualization and the endometrial control of trophoblast invasion (both of which are required for embryo implantation) and evaluate the potential involvement of endometrial extracellular vesicles (EVs) in the regulation of these physiological processes. Using primary human cell cultures, we first demonstrated that obesity is associated with significantly lower in vitro decidualization of endometrial stromal cells (ESCs). We then showed that the trophoblastic cell line’s invasive ability was greater in the presence of conditioned media from cultures of ESCs from obese women. Using mass-spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics, we found that EVs isolated from uterine supernatants of biopsies from obese women (vs. nonobese women) presented a molecular signature focused on cell remodeling and angiogenesis. Lastly, the results of functional assays indicated that supplementation of the culture medium with EVs from nonobese women can rescue (at least in part) the defect in in vitro decidualization described in ESCs from obese women. Lastly, the addition of endometrial EVs from obese women (vs. nonobese women) was associated with significantly greater invasive activity by HTR-8/SVneo cells. In conclusion, our results provided new insights into the endometrial EVs’ pivotal role in the poor uterine receptivity observed in obese women.

### Sample Protocol
Sample prep : A total of 23 infertile, normally cycling women (age: 27–40) undergoing a biopsy for fertility evaluation were included in the present study. Endometrial tissue was obtained during the putative implantation window. All study participants had undergone a diagnostic work-up. Human ESCs were isolated and cultured as described by Gonzalez et al.  Vesicles were disrupted in Laemmli buffer overnight at room temperature. Proteins were loaded on SDS-PAGE gels (short migration). Gel bands were cut out; proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM) for 30 minutes at 56°C and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration: 55 mM) for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. In-gel digestion was based on 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) overnight at 37°C, with 200 ng trypsin (Promega) per sample. Peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (v/v). The supernatant and the extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 30 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid/2% (v/v) acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
The proteome identification process was run with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 10 ppm. The trypsin digestion rule (“after Arg and Lys, except before Pro”) was applied, and semi-enzymatic cleavage was ruled out. The fix modification was set to cysteine carbamidomethylation, and methionine oxidation was considered to be a potential modification. In a second pass, N-terminal acetylation was added as another potential modification, whereas all the other above-mentioned settings remained unchanged. Identified proteins were filtered as follows: (i) peptide E‑value <0.01 and a minimum of two peptides per protein, and (ii) a protein E-value of 10-4. The false discovery rate was estimated to be 0.14% for peptides and 0.1% for proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Vesicules, Proteomic, Decidualization

### Affiliations
INRAE-UMR 1198 BREED : Biologie de la Reproduction, Environnement, Epigénétique et Développement  Equipe RHuMA : Reproduction Humaine et Modèles Animaux
INRAE

### Submitter
Céline Henry

### Lab Head
Dr Laurent Galio
INRAE-UMR 1198 BREED : Biologie de la Reproduction, Environnement, Epigénétique et Développement  Equipe RHuMA : Reproduction Humaine et Modèles Animaux


