### Accession
PXD026639

### Title
Dynamic maps of protein-protein-metabolite complexes in S. cerevisiae

### Description
The project aims to create dynamic maps of protein-protein-metabolite complexes in S. cerevisiae across growth phases using PROMIS (PROtein–Metabolite Interactions using Size separation). It is a biochemical, untargeted, proteome- and metabolome-wide method to study protein-protein and protein–metabolite complexes close to in vivo conditions. Approach involves using size exclusion chromatography (SEC) to separate complexes, followed by LC-MS-based proteomics and metabolomics analysis. This dataset was used for mashie learning approach: SLIMP, supervised learning of metabolite-protein interactions from multiple co-fractionation mass spectrometry datasets, to compute a global map of metabolite-protein interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Soluble fraction, corresponding to 40 mg of protein, was loaded on Sepax SRT SEC-300 21.2 × 300 mm column and separated at 7 mL/min flow rate, 4 °C. The fractions were frozen by snap freezing in liquid nitrogen and subsequently lyophilised and stored at –80 °C for metabolite and protein extractions. Proteins and metabolites were extracted as described earlier in Giavalisco et al., 2011. Fractionated proteins were quantified using the Bradford assay. Protein pellets from 40 fractions corresponding to 39 to 78 mL elution volume were suspended in 30 µL urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate). 20 µg of proteins from each fraction were reduced, alkylated and enzymatically digested using LysC/Trypsin Mix (Promega Corp., Fitchburg, WI) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Self-made C18 Empore® extraction discs (3M, Maplewood, MN) STAGE tips were used for protein desalting. Proteins were concentrated using the centrifugal evaporator to approximately 4 µL and stored at -80 °C until measured. Dried peptides were suspended in 60 µL MS loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.2 % TFA), and 3 µL (equivalent to 0.8–1.0 µg of peptides) were separated using C18 reversed-phase column connected to an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system in a 120 min gradient. The gradient started from 3.2% and increased to 7.2% ACN in 20 min, to 24.8% ACN over 70 min and to 35.2% ACN over 30 min, followed by a 5 min washout with 76% ACN. The Thermo Q Exactive HF operated with a data-dependent method as follows: MS full scans were performed in FTMS with resolution set to 120,000, from 300.0 to 1600.0 m/z, a maximum fill time of 50 ms, and an AGC target value of 3e6 ions. A maximum of 12 data-dependent MS2 scans was performed in the ion trap set to an AGC target of 1e5 ions with a maximal injection time of 100 ms. Precursor ion fragmentation was achieved with collision-induced fragmentation with a normalised collision energy of 27 and isolation width of 1.2 m/z. Charge states of 1 and ≥7 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16 and its built-in search engine, Andromeda. The S. cerevisiae protein database, modified November 2018, was downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311). The search also included a contaminant database.Moreover, maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed and threshold for peptide validation was set to 0.01 using a decoy database. In addition, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation was considered as variable modification while cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. In the analysis, following options were selected: “label-free quantification” and “match between runs” and the minimum length of peptide was set to at least seven amino acids. In the further analysis, only proteins with equal or more than two unique peptides were considered. Moreover, contaminants, i.e. keratins were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ligand, Protein-protein complexes, Protein-metabolite complexes

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology 
Wissenschaftspark 
Am Mühlenberg 1
14476 Potsdam-Golm 


### Submitter
Ewelina Sokolowska

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Skirycz
Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie


