### Accession
PXD012133

### Title
Evaluating cPILOT Performance on Orbitrap Instruments

### Description
A global cPILOT assay developed on an Orbitrap Velos instrument was transitioned to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument. Parameters such as the LC gradient, m/z isolation window, dynamic exclusion, targeted mass analyses, and SPS-N were optimized. The number of proteins identified on the Fusion Lumos (1848) without fractionation are close to those identified to the Orbitrap Velos (2199) with sample pre-fractionation. Additionally, including sample fractionation with the Fusion Lumos optimized parameters resulted in the identification of 4968 proteins, of which 1234 were quantified in each tissue type and genotype (N=5 or 6). Combined, the various experiments described herein informed of system-wide changes in brain, heart, and liver proteins from a late-stage amyloid precursor protein/presenilin-1 (APP/PS-1) human transgenic double knock – in mouse model of AD.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracted from brain, heart, and liver tissues from 14-month old WT (N=6) and AD (N=6) mice was digested with trypsin. Peptides were labeled by using a global cPILOT approach in which peptides were light- or heavy- dimethylated at low buffer pH and then tagged with TMT at high buffer pH. Peptides were then subjected to three different analysis methods. Briefly, a portion of peptides from one batch were not fractionated and analyzed directly by LC – MS/MS and MS3 on the Fusion Lumos. Peptides from all batches were fractionated by SCX and analyzed using either the Fusion Lumos or Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained from both the Orbitrap Velos and Fusion Lumos were processed using Proteome Discoverer v. 2.1 and 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific). Spectra were searched againstthe Uniprot M. musculus database (01/19/2018, 53035 sequences) to obtain sequence information. The searching algorithm SEQUEST HT was used. Search parameters employed were as follows: two maximum trypsin miscleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 1 Da; static modifications were either light or heavy/dimethyl 7Da Dimethyl/+28.031 or 36.028/35.070 Da (N-terminus) and carbamidomethyl modification/+57.021 Da (Cys); dynamic modifications were TMT six-plex/+229.163 Da (Lys) and oxidation modification/+15.995 Da (Met). Decoy database searching was employed to generate medium (p<0.05) confidence peptide lists. All peptides with medium confidence were used to identify and quantify proteins. To filter peptides, the following parameters were applied:  peptides with a PSM (peptide to spectral match) >1 across biological cohorts, peptide confidence level of medium, peptide rank of 1, peptide deviation of 10 ppm, and S/N ≥10. The reporter ions (i.e. m/z 126 – 131) were identified with the following parameters:  most confident centroid and 30 ppm for reporter ion mass tolerance. Furthermore, reporter ion values were normalized using internal reference scaling. To identify statistically-significant proteins, a one-way ANOVA (p <0.05) was performed. Proteins with a fold-change of >1.2 or <0.83 were further used for bioinformatics analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Combined precursor isotopic labeling and isobaric tagging (cPILOT) is an enhanced multiplexing strategy currently capable of analyzing up to 24 samples simultaneously. This capability is especially helpful when studying multiple tissues and biological replicates in models of disease, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here, cPILOT was used to study proteomes from heart, liver, and brain tissues in a late-stage amyloid precursor protein/presenilin-1 (APP/PS-1) human transgenic double-knock-in mouse model of AD. The original global cPILOT assay developed on an Orbitrap Velos instrument was transitioned to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument. The advantages of faster scan rates, lower limits of detection, and synchronous precursor selection on the Fusion Lumos afford greater numbers of isobarically tagged peptides to be quantified in comparison to the Orbitrap Velos. Parameters such as LC gradient, <i>m</i>/<i>z</i> isolation window, dynamic exclusion, targeted mass analyses, and synchronous precursor scan were optimized leading to &gt;600&#x202f;000 PSMs, corresponding to 6074 proteins. Overall, these studies inform of system-wide changes in brain, heart, and liver proteins from a mouse model of AD.

### Keywords
Fusion lumos, Multiplexing, Cpilot, Proteomics, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University
University of Pittsburgh

### Submitter
Christina King

### Lab Head
Dr Rena A.S. Robinson
Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University


