### Accession
PXD029654

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of mice lung

### Description
Primary experimental procedures for 4D Label free proteomics analysis included protein preparation, trypsin digestion, HPLC fractionation, LC-MS/MS analysis, and bioinformatics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from lung tissues of mice in groups. Briefly, after each sample was frozen in liquid nitrogen, it was ground into a powder to which lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added followed by three rounds of sonication on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, China). Remaining debris were removed by centrifugation 12,000 r/min at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis via LC-MS/MS and Data analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% FA, 2% ACN in water) then were separated on using a home-made analytical column (25-cm length, 100-μm i.d.) using a nanoElute UHPLC System (Bruker Daltonics) with solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) gradient increases conducted as follows: from 4% to 22% over 70 min, 22% to 30% over 14 min, 80% over 3 min, with a 3-min equilibration period between gradient changes and a flow rate of 450 nL/min. Peptides were subjected to capillary HPLC to concentrate them followed by mass spectrometry using a tims TOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) system. Precursors with charge states of 0 to 5 and fragments detected within the MS/MS scan range of 100 to 1700 m/z were analyzed using the TOF detector; with 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans acquired per cycle. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant (v.1.6.6.0) with an integrated Andromeda search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Swissprot Mouse database (17032 entries) then were concatenated using the reverse decoy database. The false discovery rate for proteins and peptides was adjusted to 1%. Bioinformatics analysis In the present study, ontology-based pathway analysis was conducted using the Gene Ontology (GO) Consortium-based vocabulary of terms. Subcellular localization prediction, functional enrichment, and cluster analysis were all performed using GO terms and KEGG pathways. Cluster membership was visualized using a heat map developed using the “heatmap.2” function from the “plots” R-package. Fold changes in protein levels for Control, S.pn, and S.pn + QFY group comparisons were calculated as mean values according to relative and absolute quantification ratios of protein isobaric tags. Student’s t-tests were conducted using SPSS 25.0 to assess statistical significance of results, with proteins exhibiting significant differential expression (p < 0.05) with an expression fold-change > 2 identified as differentially expressed biomarkers.

### Publication Abstract
QingFei Yin (QFY), a Chinese traditional medicine recipe, is known for its excellent therapeutic pharmacological effects for the treatment of bacterial lung infections, although its molecular mechanism of action remains unknown. Here, QFY chemical composition was determined using a High-Performance Liquid Chromatography-Mass (HPLC-MS/MS)-based method then QFY was evaluated for protective pharmacological effects against pneumonia using two models: a <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i>-induced <i>in vivo</i> mouse model and an <i>in vitro</i> pneumolysin (PLY)-induced murine lung alveolar-derived MH-S cell line-based model. Notably, QFY exerted prominent anti-pneumonia effects both <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i>. To further explore QFY protective effects, 4D label-free proteomics analysis, pathologic evaluation, and immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis were conducted to identify cellular pathways involved in QFY protection. Notably, our results indicated that NF-&#x3ba;B/NLRP3 and autophagy pathways may contribute to pharmacological effects associated with QFY-based protection. Briefly, QFY triggered autophagy <i>via</i> down-regulation of upstream NLRP3/mTOR signaling pathway events, resulting in the amelioration of inflammatory injury. Collectively, our results revealed molecular mechanisms underlying QFY protection against pneumonia as a foundation for the future development of novel treatments to combat this disease and reduce antibiotic abuse.

### Keywords
Mice;lung;lc-msms

### Affiliations
changchun university of chinese medicine

### Submitter
Liping Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liping Sun
changchun university of chinese medicine


