### Accession
PXD037940

### Title
Effect of parkin insufficiency on liver and striatal synaptic mitochondrial protein expression

### Description
Using a knock-out model we assessed the effects of parkin insufficiency on the expression of mitochondrial proteins in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria isolated by discontinuous Percoll gradient centrifugation were lysed in 4% SDS/ 100 mM Tris/ 100 mM DTT pH 7.4.  50 mcg of protein lysate was processed using the FASP method.  Briefly, proteins were denatured with 8M Urea, alkylated with iodoacetamide, washed, and digested overnight with trypsin.  Typtic digests were eluted and peptides were captured and desalted by strong cation exchange followed by drying in vacuo.  Dried peptides were solubilized in 0.1% formic acid and quantified by NanoDrop using the Scopes Method. Injection samples prepared in autosampler vials were composed of 2.5 mcg of total peptide in 0.1% formic acid/ 2% acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using MaxQuant (2.0.3.0) against the Uniprot Mus musculus proteome (UP000000589) using the MaxQuant internal contaminant list to obtain protein identifications. Enzymatic cleavage specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Label multiplicity was set to two with a heavy label to account for tri-deuterated leucine (+3.0188325 Da). Variable modifications were set to oxidation (M), phospho (STY) and Acetyl (N-term) and the only fixed modification used was carbamidomethyl C. Quantitation was achieved using the MaxQuant standard label-free quantification algorithm with default settings plus match between runs, second peptide and dependent peptide search with an FDR of 0.01. Total LFQ intensity for each protein ID in each sample of the proteinGroups.txt file was determined by summing of light and heavy LFQ-intensity values prior to subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse, Neurodegeneration, Liver, Striatal synapatic, Mitophagy, Parkinson’s disease, Parkin

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha NE

### Submitter
Kelly Stauch

### Lab Head
Dr Howard S. Fox
Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha NE


