### Accession
PXD010743

### Title
Amphibalanus amphitrite Longitudinal Canal Tissue

### Description
Proteomic analysis of Amphibalanus amphitrite longitudinal canal tissue in comparison to sub-mantle/reproductive tissue to ascertain functional similarity.

### Sample Protocol
Dissected tissue was homeogenized and underwent proteolysis with LysC/Trypsin using pressure cycling technology. Samples were run on a Sciex TripleTOF 5600.

### Data Protocol
MS data were searched on MASCOT for protein identfication and further analyzed using X!Tandem and Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
The morphology and composition of tissue located within parietal shell canals of the barnacle Amphibalanus amphitrite are described. Longitudinal canal tissue nearly spans the length of side shell plates, terminating near the leading edge of the specimen basis in proximity to female reproductive tissue located throughout the peripheral sub-mantle region, i.e. mantle parenchyma. Microscopic examination of stained longitudinal canal sections reveal the presence of cell nuclei as well as an abundance of micron-sized spheroids staining positive for basic residues and lipids. Spheroids with the same staining profile are present extensively in ovarioles, particularly within oocytes which are readily identifiable at various developmental stages. Mass spectrometry analysis of longitudinal canal tissue compared to tissue collected from the mantle parenchyma reveals a nearly 50% overlap of the protein profile with the greatest number of sequence matches to vitellogenin, a glycolipoprotein playing a key role in vitellogenesis-yolk formation in developing oocytes. The morphological similarity and proximity to female reproductive tissue, combined with mass spectrometry of the two tissues, provides compelling evidence that one of several possible functions of longitudinal canal tissue is supporting the female reproductive system of A. amphitrite, thus expanding the understanding of the growth and development of this sessile marine organism.

### Keywords
Reproduction, Barnacle, Longitudinal canal tissue

### Affiliations
Naval Research Laboratory

### Submitter
Janna Schultzhaus

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Spillmann
Naval Research Laboratory


