### Accession
PXD005209

### Title
Differential signaling through p190 and p210 BCR-ABL fusion proteins revealed by interactome and phosphoproteome analysis

### Description
Using quantitative mass spectrometry approaches, we have interrogated the differences in p190BCR-ABL and p210BCR-ABL signaling. By integrating protein interaction data generated by the in vivo labeling technique of BioID with tyrosine phosphorylation profiling, we identified a set of molecules that are differentially regulated between to the two forms of BCR-ABL.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen SILAC Labeled cell pellets were lysed in 9 M urea buffer with protease inhibitors (Halt™ Cocktail ThermoFisher #78429 ), sodium pyrophosphate (2.5 mM), sodium orthovanadate (1 mM), sodium fluoride (5 mM), β-glycerophosphate (1 mM) by 3 rounds of probe sonication (duty cycle 30%, 20 two second pulses). Protein concentration of lysates was determined by Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit. Twenty milligrams of protein lysates from each labeling condition was mixed and subjected to trypsin in-solution digestion, followed by lyophilization. A total of 60mg and 40mg for the BAF3 and MPP experiment, respectively, per replicate of lyophilized tryptic peptides were used for phosphotyrosine enrichment using PTMScan® Phospho-Tyrosine rabbit monoclonal antibody kit (P-Tyr-1000) (Cell Signaling Technology, #8803). Anti-phosphotyrosine immunoprecipitation was carried out following the manufacturer’s instructions. A 300μg aliquot of SILAC mix was also subjected to a separate in-solution tryptic digestion and was fractionated by basic reverse phase liquid chromatography into 12 fractions and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Methods used for execution of the BioID experiment were an amalgamation of protocols from the Gingras and Roux groups61,62 with slight modifications to both. Cells destined for BioID protocols were cultured for 24 hours in 50 μM biotin containing culture medium. Lysis was carried out in BioID lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 0.4% SDS, 2% Triton X-100 with Halt™ protease inhibitors) by probe sonication as described above. After the 1st round of sonication the sample was diluted with equal volume of 50mM Tris, target protein concentration was 5 mg/ml. Lysates were quantified by BCA and dithiotheritol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 1 mM for the pulldown. A ratio of 4 mg of lysate per 300uls of MyOne™ Dynabeads® Streptavidin C1 (#65001) to 5ug of trypsin per replicate was used for all mass spectrometry experiments. For label free experiments 4mg per IP replicate was used. For SILAC experiments 8mg per cell line was mixed. An aliquot of input was collected for western blot analysis and lysate/bead slurry was rotated overnight at 4°C, aliquot of the flow-through was collected. All bead washes were in 1.3 mL; 2 times with 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5 followed by 2 washes with bioID lysis buffer, and finally 3 washes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). On the third wash 10% of the total bead slurry was aliquot for boiling elution with 1X Laemmli Sample Buffer (Bio-Rad #1610747) with 20mM DTT for immunoblotting. Additional streptavidin isolates were generated by elution for validation of mass spectrometry data by immunoblotting. The rest of the bead slurry was subjected to on-bead digestion. Wash buffer was removed and beads were spun down and resuspended in 50 μL of 8 M UREA, 50 mM ABC, pH 8.0 to denature the bound proteins. Proteins were reduced by adding 5 μL of 1 M DTT and incubating at 30°C for 60 minutes, then samples were alkylation by adding 5 μL of 0.5M iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes. The volume was then increased to 400 μL with 50 mM ABC pH 8.0 containing 5ug of sequencing grade trypsin. Digestion was allowed to go overnight on a shaker kept at 30°C. The beads were removed from the digest solution and washed once with 50 μL of 50 mM ABC and all beads removed, the solution was pooled. The final 450 μL was acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid, spun at 18,000xg and loaded on to a C18 homemade stage tip for clean-up, stage-protocol was based on previously published methods.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis: Proteome Discoverer software suite (v 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for quantitation and database searches. The MS/MS data were searched using the SEQUEST search algorithm against a Mouse RefSeq database (v73 containing 58,485 entries) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Additionally, the entire BirA-p190BCR-ABL sequence, which represents the common sequence of p190BCR-ABL and p210BCR-ABL and the p210BCR-ABL specific sequence (DH and PH domain) as a separate entry were added to the database. Search parameters used for SEQUEST search algorithm included trypsin as protease with full specific and a maximum of one allowed missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation at methionine and biotinylation at Lysine as variable modification. In case of phosphotyrosine immunoprecipitation data analysis phosphorylation at tyrosine was selected as variable modification. For all the 3-State SILAC labeled samples, 13C6, 15N2-lysine, 2H4-lysine, 13C6-arginine and 13C6, 15N4-arginine as variable modifications. The precursor tolerance was set at 10 ppm while the fragment match tolerance was set to 0.1 Da. The PSMs, peptides and proteins were filtered at 1% false discovery rate cut-off calculated using decoy database searches. After database searching SILAC ratios of peptides were quantified with Pyquant.30 For label-free analysis of the MPP BioID experiment we used the Maxquant software package with default settings to obtain label free quantitation.50 Post processing and bioinformatics: In-house python scripts (https://github.com/pandeylab/pythomics) were used for post-processing annotation, protein inference, and normalization of the SILAC data. A schematic of data analysis pipeline can be found in Supplemental Figure 1. To correct for loading biases in the SILAC mixes in the pTyr experiments we normalized the data based on the total protein measurements from 12 bRPLC fractions. Total protein was normalized to the median and that correction factor was applied to all values in pTyr data. After normalization, the total protein SILAC ratios for all peptides mapping to individual proteins were grouped and the median value was calculated for protein level measurements. For pTyr data SILAC ratios were maintained at the peptide level and grouped by site, and median values were calculated. SILAC ratios for pTyr values were adjusted based on the corresponding abundance value from the total protein data the phosphosite mapped. Additional median normalization was applied to the p190BCR-ABL/p210BCR-ABL ratio as p190BCR-ABL cells were observed to have a slight increase in global phosphorylation compared to p210 cells in the Ba/F3 experiment, the opposite for observed in MPP experiment and was normalization similarly (Supplemental Figure 3b). Finally the median values from all three of the pTyr replicates was calculated. The SILAC BioID data followed a similar scheme although no correction was applied for abundance values from the total protein. BioID data went through a series of filtering steps to control for endogenously biotinylated proteins, common contaminates, and literature searching. BioID data was then referenced with the CRAPome database and proteins found in greater than 35 experiments were removed. Then proteins were filtered if they were not sampled in at least 2 of the replicates. Proteins were indexed if they were identified in the negative control (endogenously biotinylated proteins) the median value of all endogenous proteins identified in SILAC experiment was close to zero. These serve as a loading control.

### Publication Abstract
Two major types of leukemogenic BCR-ABL fusion proteins are p190<sup>BCR-ABL</sup>and p210<sup>BCR-ABL</sup>. Although the two fusion proteins are closely related, they can lead to different clinical outcomes. A thorough understanding of the signaling programs employed by these two fusion proteins is necessary to explain these clinical differences. We took an integrated approach by coupling protein-protein interaction analysis using biotinylation identification with global phosphorylation analysis to investigate the differences in signaling between these two fusion proteins. Our findings suggest that p190<sup>BCR-ABL</sup> and p210<sup>BCR-ABL</sup> differentially activate important signaling pathways, such as JAK-STAT, and engage with molecules that indicate interaction with different subcellular compartments. In the case of p210<sup>BCR-ABL</sup>, we observed an increased engagement of molecules active proximal to the membrane and in the case of p190<sup>BCR-ABL</sup>, an engagement of molecules of the cytoskeleton. These differences in signaling could underlie the distinct leukemogenic process induced by these two protein variants.

### Keywords
Bioid, Phosphoproteomics, P210, Leukemia, Bcr-abl, Mass spectrometry, P190

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA ( lab head )

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA ( lab head )


