### Accession
PXD008323

### Title
Characterization of phosphohistidine phosphatase 1-induced changes in the mouse liver proteome

### Description
Phosphohistidine signaling in mammalian biological systems has not been well characterized. In this study, we investigated the impact of phosphohistidine phosphatase 1 (PHPT1) expression on the hepatic proteome profile in vivo. PHPT1 overexpression was carried out using adenoviral-based transgene delivery for liver-specific overexpression of PHPT1 while a heterozygous knockout was used as a model of PHPT1 deficiency. These two models were characterized using mass spectrometry-based proteomics and label-free relative quantitation. In conjunction with bioinformatic analysis, PHPT1-induced changes in several key proteins and pathways were identified in the liver. Implementation of these models in future studies will lead to far greater insight into the role of phosphohistidine signaling and PHPT1 regulation in mammalian cells.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissue was homogenized in a 125mM Tris buffer with protease and phosphatase inhibitors on ice. Protein extraction was performed in a 2% SDS buffer at 95° C followed by sonication and centrifugation. Following protein extraction from liver tissues, 150µg of protein from tissue lysates were prepared for mass spectrometry analyses using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method. In brief, samples were placed on a 30kDa filter spin column (Millipore) and washed with 8M urea to remove any detergents. Buffer exchange was followed by reduction and alkylation using DTT and idoacetamide, respectively. Samples were then digested with a combination of Lys-C and trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C and peptides were extracted from the FASP column with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and 0.5 M sodium chloride. Samples were then desalted using Sep-Pak C18 desalt columns (Waters). Following centrifugation under vacuum until dryness, samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometric analyses.   Peptide digests were separated using a reversed-phase (specific parameters) UPLC C18 column (Thermo) on an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fischer) UPLC system over a two-hour gradient (5-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). Mass spectrometric analyses was performed by a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo), using a top 10 data-dependent acquisition method with a dynamic exclusion time of 20 sec. Full scan and MS/MS resolution was 70,000 and 17,500, respectively.

### Data Protocol
High-resolution MS data were searched against the Uniprot mouse proteome database using the MaxQuant Andromeda (version 1.6.0.16, maxquant.org) search algorithm. Variable modifications included phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as well as methionine oxidation. First search peptide tolerance was 20ppm and the main search peptide tolerance was 4.5ppm. Identifications were accepted at a protein and peptide false discovery rate of less than 1% and overall localization probabilities of ≥ 95% for modified peptides. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.7.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate and visualize MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0%.. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 97.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphohistidine phosphatase 1 (PHPT1), the only known phosphohistidine phosphatase in mammals, regulates phosphohistidine levels of several proteins including those involved in signaling, lipid metabolism, and potassium ion transport. While the high-resolution structure of human PHPT1 (hPHPT1) is available and residues important for substrate binding and catalytic activity have been reported, little is known about post-translational modifications that modulate hPHPT1 activity. Here we characterize the structural and functional impact of hPHPT1 oxidation upon exposure to a reactive oxygen species, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Specifically, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was used to quantify site-specific oxidation of redox-sensitive residues of hPHPT1. Results from this study revealed that H2O2 exposure induces selective oxidation of hPHPT1 at Met95, a residue within the substrate binding region. Explicit solvent molecular dynamics simulations, however, predict only a minor effect of Met95 oxidation in the structure and dynamics of the apo-state of the hPHPT1 catalytic site, suggesting that if Met95 oxidation alters hPHPT1 activity, then it will do so by altering the stability of an intermediate state. Employing a novel mass spectrometry-based assay, we determined that H2O2-induced oxidation does not impact hPHPT1 function negatively; a result contrary to the common conception that protein oxidation is typically a loss-of-function modification.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Hepatic proteomics, Phosphohistidine, Phpt1

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic
Cell and Molecular Biology Department, at the University of South Florida

### Submitter
Daniel Martin

### Lab Head
Dr Stanley Stevens Jr
Cell and Molecular Biology Department, at the University of South Florida


