### Accession
PXD005336

### Title
Target Landscape of Clinical Kinase Inhibitors

### Description
Here, we provide a comprehensive overview of the selectivity profiles of 242 kinase inhibitors currently in clinical trials. We screened available inhibitors against human protein kinases by using the Kinobead technology resulting in a drug matrix identifying the druggable kinome and related proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Kinobead selectivity profiling was performed as described previously (Medard, G., Pachl, F., Ruprecht, B., Klaeger, S., Heinzlmeir, S., Helm, D., Qiao, H., Ku, X., Wilhelm, M., Kuehne, T., Wu, Z., Dittmann, A., Hopf, C., Kramer, K., and Kuster, B. (2015) Optimized chemical proteomics assay for kinase inhibitor profiling, J Proteome Res 14, 1574-1586.) Briefly, 5 mg of a protein mixture of the four cell lines or a single cell line were incubated with compound dilution series in DMSO (3 nM, 10 nM, 30 nM, 100 nM, 300 nM, 1 µM, 3 µM, 30 µM and DMSO) or single compound dose (5 µM) for 45 min at 4°C. The preincubation step was followed by incubation with kinobeads (35 µl settled beads). Bound proteins were eluted with LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE, Invitrogen) containing 50 mM DTT. For the calculation of a correction factor, the flowthrough of the DMSO control was incubated with fresh beads for a second time. Eluates were alkylated wit CAA and ingel digestion was performed. Peptides were then measured via LC-MS/MS on a nanoLCUltra 1D+ (Eksigent) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite. Up to 15 precursorer where subjected to fragmentation by HCD in a data dependent setup. A kinase peptide inclusion list was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30), searching against a human Uniprot reference database (version 22.03.2016, only canonical entries, annotated with PFAM) with Andromeda. Label free quantification and match between runs were enabled. Search results were filtered for 1% peptide and protein FDR, contaminants and reverse identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Kinase inhibitors are important cancer therapeutics. Polypharmacology is commonly observed, requiring thorough target deconvolution to understand drug mechanism of action. Using chemical proteomics, we analyzed the target spectrum of 243 clinically evaluated kinase drugs. The data revealed previously unknown targets for established drugs, offered a perspective on the "druggable" kinome, highlighted (non)kinase off-targets, and suggested potential therapeutic applications. Integration of phosphoproteomic data refined drug-affected pathways, identified response markers, and strengthened rationale for combination treatments. We exemplify translational value by discovering SIK2 (salt-inducible kinase 2) inhibitors that modulate cytokine production in primary cells, by identifying drugs against the lung cancer survival marker MELK (maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase), and by repurposing cabozantinib to treat FLT3-ITD-positive acute myeloid leukemia. This resource, available via the ProteomicsDB database, should facilitate basic, clinical, and drug discovery research and aid clinical decision-making.

### Keywords
Target, Clinical kinase inhibitors, Lc-ms/ms, Selectivity, Kinase inhibitors, Mass spectrometry, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TUM

### Submitter
Susan Klaeger

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany


