### Accession
PXD044683

### Title
1. SILAC based secretome analysis of WT and tKO cells

### Description
Integrins play a vital role in coordinating between the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the intracellular environment, thus enabling transduction of biomechanical signals to maintain tissue homeostasis. Here we investigate the significance of collagen-binding integrins in regulating fibroblast functions with relevance to fibrosis. Our data suggest that secretome from primary dermal fibroblasts isolated from mice lacking three collagen-binding integrins α1, α2 and α11 shows downregulation of several proteins essential for structure and regulation of crucial pro-fibrotic ECM components. In summary, abrogation of integrin-mediated cell-collagen association attenuates fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Dermal fibroblasts were subjected to depletion of intracellular methionine, arginine, and lysine by incubating in SILAC medium (Met/Arg/Lys-free DMEM/F12), supplemented with 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 200 mg/L L-proline, and 10% dialyzed FBS at 37°C for 30 min. Fibroblasts were then pulse-labeled for 24 h in SILAC medium supplemented with 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 200 mg/L L-proline, 10% dFBS, 100 mM methionine analog azidohomoalanine and either heavy (146 mg/ml Lys-8-HCl 13C6,15N2 / 84 mg/ml Arg-10 13C6, 15N4 or medium isotopes (146 mg/ml Lys4D:2HCl 2H / 84 mg/ml Arg6-HCl 13C6. Supernatants collected from the cells were lysed and the labeled proteins were enriched using Click Chemistry Capture kit followed by covalently binding to alkyne agarose column. Finally, the peptides were purified using StageTips before subjecting to mass spectrometry.  All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm length— 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent**). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 65.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 13.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 15.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the canonical murine Uniprot database (downloaded at: 16.6.2019), including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. SILAC/dimethyl labeling quantification was used, and the re-quantify option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Integrin, Collagen, Fibrosis, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Translational Matrix Biology, University of Cologne, Medical Faculty, Cologne Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-Associated Diseases (CECAD)and Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Krieg
Translational Matrix Biology, University of Cologne, Medical Faculty, Cologne Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-Associated Diseases (CECAD)and Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


