### Accession
PXD037438

### Title
A hybrid structural determination approach to investigate protein-RNA complexes of the nucleocapsid protein of SARS-CoV-2

### Description
UV-light-induced protein-RNA cross-linking followed by MS analysis was used to identify the interaction sites between the N-terminal (NTD) or C-terminal domain (CTD) of the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein and the s2m element of the viral RNA.

### Sample Protocol
Complexes of nucleocapsid NTD or CTD, respectively, with s2m RNA were cross-linked by 254-nm UV light in a Spectrolinker device (4.8 J cm-2). Samples were ethanol precipitated and digested with RNases (T1 and A) and trypsin. Differential 16O/18O labeling using ATP was performed as described in Goetze et al., Anal. Chem., 2021. Peptide-RNA adducts were enriched from the digested samples by titanium dioxide metal affinity chromatography and analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument. Data was acquired with stepped HCD collision energies (23 ± 5%). Precursor and fragment ions were detected in the orbitrap analyzer. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.5, with adaptations for protein-RNA cross-linking searches as described in Dorn et al., Nat. Methods, 2017. The protein sequence database contained the respective nucleocapsid domain and its reversed sequence, the RNA sequence was the one of the s2m construct used. RNA adducts of up to four nucleotides and different neutral loss types were considered according to Sarnowski et al., bioRxiv, 2022. Only spectra corresponding to the mass difference of the 16O/18O labeling step (6.0127 Da) were searched. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 20 ppm. A 1% false discovery rate cut-off at the unique peptide-RNA conjugate level was used to control the error rate for identifications.  A file list document connects the individual result tables to the raw files and sample types. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein-rna cross-linking, Sars-cov-2, Protein-rna complexes, Uv cross-linking, Nucleocapsid

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


