### Accession
PXD019947

### Title
Autophagy Deficiency Promotes Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Resistance to T Cell-Mediated Cytotoxicity by Blocking Tenascin-C Degradation

### Description
Most triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients fail to respond to T cell-mediated immunotherapies. Unfortunately, the molecular determinants are still poorly understood. Breast cancer is the disease genetically linked to a deficiency in autophagy. Here, we show that autophagy promotes tumour immune response, and autophagy defects inhibit T cell-mediated killing in TNBC tumours. Mechanistically, we identify Tenascin-C as a strong candidate for autophagy deficiency-mediated immunosuppression, in which Tenascin-C is Lys63-ubiquitinated by Skp2, particularly at Lys924 and Lys1882, thus promoting its recognition by p62 and leading to its selective autophagic degradation. High Tenascin-C expression is associated with poor prognosis and inversely correlated with LC3B expression and CD8+ T cells in TNBC patients. More importantly, inhibition of Tenascin-C in autophagy-impaired TNBC cells sensitizes T cell-mediated tumour killing and improves antitumour effects of single anti-PD1/PD-L1 therapy. Our results provide a potential strategy against TNBC with the combination of Tenascin-C blockade and immune checkpoint inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were grown to 80% confluence in high glucose (4.5 g/liter) Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (with glutamine and sodium pyruvate) containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37°C with 95% air and 5% CO2. By using a SILAC Protein Quantitation Kit (Thermo Pierce) according to manufacturer’s instructions, MEF-WT cell line was labeled with “heavy isotopes” (Lysine 13C6 and arginine13C615N4), and MEF-Atg5-/- cell line was labeled with “light isotopes” (Lysine 12C6 and arginine 12C6 14N4). Briefly, the cell line was grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and either the “heavy” form or “light” for more than six generations before being harvested, to achieve more than 97% labeling efficiency. After that, the cells were further expanded in SILAC media to desired cell number (~5×108) in fifteen 15 cm flasks. Then the samples were send to PTM BioLabs Inc for further study. The harvested “heavy” and “light” labeled cells were lysed by using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III). The supernatants were saved after centrifuge at 20,000g for 10 min at 4 °C. After concentration measurement, equal amounts of crude proteins in supernatant labeled “heavy” or “light” were mixed and the crude proteins were precipitated by adding TCA with 15% final concentration (v/v) (soluble fraction). After washing twice with -20 oC acetone, the proteins pellets were dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) for trypsin digestion. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion at 37 oC overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions, Then, the peptides were combined into 16 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 26 min, 22% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 10000 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the Orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800.  The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Swiss-Prot Mouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification, oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
Most triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients fail to respond to T cell-mediated immunotherapies. Unfortunately, the molecular determinants are still poorly understood. Breast cancer is the disease genetically linked to a deficiency in autophagy. Here, we show that autophagy defects in TNBC cells inhibit T cell-mediated tumour killing in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, we identify Tenascin-C as a candidate for autophagy deficiency-mediated immunosuppression, in which Tenascin-C is Lys63-ubiquitinated by Skp2, particularly at Lys942 and Lys1882, thus promoting its recognition by p62 and leading to its selective autophagic degradation. High Tenascin-C expression is associated with poor prognosis and inversely correlated with LC3B expression and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells in TNBC patients. More importantly, inhibition of Tenascin-C in autophagy-impaired TNBC cells sensitizes T cell-mediated tumour killing and improves antitumour effects of single anti-PD1/PDL1 therapy. Our results provide a potential strategy for targeting TNBC with the combination of Tenascin-C blockade and immune checkpoint inhibitors.

### Keywords
Tenascin-c, T cell-mediated killing, Autophagy deficiency, Immune checkpoint inhibitors, Tnbc

### Affiliations
Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Diagnosis and Therapy, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou 510060, China

### Submitter
Rong Deng

### Lab Head
Dr Rong Deng
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Diagnosis and Therapy, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou 510060, China


