### Accession
PXD001022

### Title
Proteomic analyses of embryogenic tissues in Picea balfouriana treated by 6-BAP

### Description
In this study, iTRAQ technology was applied to characterize the genes and proteins that are differentially expressed among tissues under the influence of different levels of 6-BAP(2.5 μM, 3.6 μM and 5 μM). There were two biological and three technological replicates for each treatment. Two biological replicates from the 2.5 μM treatment were labeled with reagents 115 and 121, while iTRAQ tags 117 and 119 were used to label two biological replicates from the 3.6 μM treatment, and two biological replicates from the 5 μM treatment were labeled with reagents 116 and 118.

### Sample Protocol
Protein preparation and digestion  Tissues were suspended in 500 μL of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 4% CHAPS, 40 mM Tris-HCl), with 1 mM PMSF and 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (final concentration). After 5 min of vigorous vortexing, dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM. Following mixing, the samples were homogenized via sonication cracking at a low temperature for 15 min and then centrifuged for 20 min at 25,000 x g, after which the supernatant was homogenized well with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56°C, followed by 55 mM IAM at 45°C in a darkroom. Then, the supernatant was mixed well with ice-cold acetone (1:4, v/v), allowed to rest for 2 h at -20°C and centrifuged for 20 min at 25,000 x g. For digestion, the protein pellets from the previous step were resuspended in digestion buffer (200 μL of 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate, TEAB) and broken up via sonication cracking at a low temperature for 15 min. Finally, equal aliquots (500 μL) from each lysate were centrifuged for 20 min, and the supernatant was stored for use at -80°C.  iTRAQ labeling The iTRAQ labeling of peptide samples derived from control and ethanol-treated conditions was performed using the iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For each treatment, four samples (two biological replicates and two technical replicates) were subjected to iTRAQ labeling. Two biological replicates from the 2.5 μM treatment were labeled with reagents 115 and 121, while iTRAQ tags 117 and 119 were used to label two biological replicates from the 3.6 μM treatment, and two biological replicates from the 5 μM treatment were labeled with reagents 116 and 118. The peptides labeled with the respective isobaric tags were reconstituted in 4 mL of Buffer A (25 mM NaH2PO4, 25% ACN, pH 2.7). The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were fractionated using an Ultremex SCX column (4.6 x 200 mm) with the LC-20AB system (Shimadzu, Japan) at a flow rate of 1.0 mL min-1. The 22-min HPLC gradient consisted of 100% buffer A for 10 min; 5-35% buffer B (25 mM NaH2PO4, 1 MKCL in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) for 11 min; and finally, 35-80% buffer B for 1 min. The resultant chromatograms were recorded at 214 nm. The twenty-one collected fractions were lyophilized and desalted with Strata X cartridges and concentrated to dryness using a vacuum centrifuge. The samples were stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis Mass spectroscopy analysis was performed using an AB SCIEX TripleTOF™ 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA), coupled with an online microflow HPLC system (Shimadzu, JAPAN), as described elsewhere (Unwin et al. 2010). The peptides were separated using a nanobored C18 column with a picofrit nanospray tip (75 Km ID x 15 cm, 5 μM particles) (New Objectives, Woburn, MA). Separation was performed at a constant flow rate of 20 μL min-1, using a splitter to achieve an effective flow rate of 0.2 μL min-1. Mass spectrometry data were acquired in positive ion mode, with a selected mass range of 300-2000 m/z. Peptides showing charge states of +2 to +4 were selected for MS/MS analysis. The three most abundantly charged peptides above a count threshold were selected for MS/MS and dynamically excluded for 30 s at a ±30 mDa mass tolerance. Smart information-dependent acquisition (IDA) was activated with an automatic collision energy and automatic MS/MS accumulation. The fragment intensity multiplier was set to 20, and the maximum accumulation time was 2 s. The

### Publication Abstract
The cytokinin 6-benzylaminopurine (6-BAP) influences the embryogenic capacity of the tissues of Picea balfouriana during long subculture (after 3&#x2009;months). Tissues that proliferate in 3.6 and 5&#x2009;&#xb5;M 6-BAP exhibit the highest and lowest embryogenic capacity, respectively, generating 113&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;6 and 23&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;3 mature embryos per 100&#x2009;mg of tissue. In this study, a comparative transcriptomic and proteomic approach was applied to characterize the genes and proteins that are differentially expressed among tissues under the influence of different levels of 6-BAP. A total of 51&#x2009;375 unigenes and 2617 proteins were obtained after quality filtering. There were 2770 transcripts for proteins found among these unigenes. Gene ontology (GO) analysis of the differentially expressed unigenes and proteins showed that they were involved in cell and binding activity and were enriched in ribosome and glutathione metabolism pathways. Ribosomal proteins, glutathione S-transferase proteins, germin-like proteins and calmodulin-independent protein kinases were up-regulated in the embryogenic tissues with the highest embryogenic ability (treated with 3.6&#x2009;&#xb5;M 6-BAP), which was validated via quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis, and these proteins might serve as molecular markers of embryogenic ability. Data are available via Sequence Read Archive (SRA) and ProteomeXchange with identifier SRP042246 and PXD001022, respectively.

### Keywords
Picea balfouriana, 6-bap, Embryogenic tissues, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Forest Genetics and Tree Breeding, Research Institute of Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry
Chinese Academy of Forestry

### Submitter
Qingfen Li

### Lab Head
Dr Junhui Wang
State Key Laboratory of Forest Genetics and Tree Breeding, Research Institute of Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry


