### Accession
PXD015865

### Title
Label free quantitative (LFQ) proteomic analysis of mouse lymphatic endothelial cells and primary mouse dendritic cells in response to IFNgamma treatment in presence or absence of 3-HKA

### Description
To explore the cellular pathways and the molecular functions affected by a novel biogenic amine, (3-HKA), we performed a label free quantitative (LFQ) proteomic analysis of mouse lymphatic endothelial cells (LEC), and primary dendritic cells, treated with IFNgammaplus or minus 3-HKA.  Biological triplicates, of total cell lysates, were fractionated by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis (1DEF) and the “in gel” tryptic derived peptides analyzed by nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HF quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).  LFQ analysis highlighted that 3-HKA downregulated many of the inflammatory pathways, more notably JAK/STAT1 and NFkB, associated with IFNgamma activation.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse LEC C57BL/6 primary Lymphatic Endothelial Cells  (Cell Biologics)  were grown in tissue culture flasks pre-coated with 0.1% gelatin in mouse complete endothelial growth cell medium (Cell Biologics). In all experiments, LECs were used between passages 3 and 5. LECs were seeded in complete endothelial cell medium (MEM) and left untreated or treated with recombinant murine 50 ng/ml INF-Ɣ (Peprotech; Cat. #   315-05)in presence or absence of 3-amino-1-(2-amino-3-hydroxyphenyl)-, hydrobromide (1:1)(3-hydroxy-L-kynurenamine=3-HKA) To obtain primary mouse dendritic cells (pDC, C57BL6 mice were injected subcutaneously with 40 × 106 B16-Flt3L-producing melanoma cells as previously described34. Twelve-14 days after injection, spleens were harvested and DCs were purified by density gradient centrifugation using 30% bovine albumin solution (Sigma-Aldrich). The preparation contained 70–80% DCs. To further enrich the DC population, cells were purified using CD11c+ antibody-conjugated magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec). The pDcs were left untreated or treated with recombinant murine 50 ng/ml INF-Ɣ in presence or absence of 3-hydroxy-L-kynurenamine using the same protocol as for mouse LECs.  For all proteomic experiments cells were lysed on ice withcold lysis buffer consisting of 150 mM NaCl; 10 mM MgCL2, 2mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, 2.5 mM glycerophosphate, 1mM DTT, and supplemented with complete protease and phosphatase inhibitors described in the chemical section.  The lysates were shaken on a rocker at 4ºC for 15 minutes followed by treatment with benzonase nuclease (5 units/ul lysate) on ice, for 30 minutes before being spun at 14,000 rpm in a microcentrifuge for 15 minutes, at 4ºC.  The supernatant was further cleared with EMD Millipore filters (cat # UFC 0DV 25).  Quantitation of total protein from different cell lysates was performed using the Micro BCA™ Protein Assay Kit, (cat # 23235 from Thermofisher Scientific).  Equal amounts of whole cell lysates (between 30 to 100 ug) from mouse LEC and primary DC, previously subjected to different treatments, were further fractionated 1D SDS-PAGE. Gels were silver stained (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL USA) and eight protein gel bands were cut across each sample lane. In gel, proteins were reduced with 25 mM TCEP.HCl (Thermo Scientiﬁc) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, containing 8 M urea at pH 8.5 for 35 minutes at RT followed by alkylation with 100 mM iodacetamide for 50 minutes in the dark at RT.     In gel protein digestion was carried out at 37°C overnight (12 hours) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.9) using a combination of 3 enzymes (25 ng/ul of trypsin/LysC and 10 ng/ul of GluC) for each gel piece.  Th ereaction was quenched with formic acid (0.2% final concentration).  The peptides mixture, extracted from all enzymatic digestions, were desalted on C18 Prep clean columns (EMD Millipore).  nanoLC MS/MS: technical triplicates of the peptides mixtures were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated by a 90 and/or 120 min linear gradient containing 4% to 30% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid at 400nL/min (Optima™ LC/MS, Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh.  Ionization was run in the positive ion mode, applying the data–dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, where full MS scans were obtained with a range of m/z from 300 to 1600, a mass resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, and a target value of 1.00E+06 with the maximum injection time of 50 ms. HCD collision was performed on the 15 most significant peaks, and tandem mass spectra were acquired at a mass resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200 and a target value of 1.00E+05. The normalized collision energy was 32%. We excluded precursor ions with single,unassigned, or five and higher charge states from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification: In the case of the mouse LEC and primary DCs, the raw files from each technical and biological replicate were filtered, de novo sequenced and assigned with a protein ID using Peaks 8.0/8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada), by searching against the mouse (Mus musculus) Swiss-Prot database (March 2018; 91,343 entries). The following search parameters were applied for the protein ID analysis:  trypsin, Lys-C and GluC were chosen for restriction enzymes with two allowed missed cleaved at one or both peptide end.  The parent mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm using monoisotopic mass, and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.06 Da.  Carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.0215 on C) was specified in PEAKS 8.5 as a fixed modification.  Methionine, lysine, proline, arginine, cysteine and asparagine oxidations (+15.99 on CKMNPR), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ-0.98) and pyro-Glu from glutamine (Q-18.01 N-term) were set as variable modifications.  Data were validated using the false discovery rate (FDR) method built in PEAKS 8.0/8.5 and protein identifications were accepted if they could be characterized with a confidence score of (−10lgP) 15 and above for peptides and (−10lgP) 15 and above for proteins.  Searches for protein ID were retrieved using a minimum of 1 peptide per protein, after data were filtered for less than 1.5% FDR for peptides and less than 1.5 % FDR for proteins identifications (p < 0.05). An independent validation of the MS/MS-based peptides and protein identification was performed with the Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.6.2, Proteome Software Inc.) using the compatible “.mzid” files exported from PEAKS 8.0/8.5. The Scaffold built in option “MuDPIT” was used to combine multiple files from biological and/or technical replicates. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  Gene ontology (GO) annotations and analysis of networks and cellular pathways  Comparison of networks, functional analyses, biochemical and cellular pathways associated with the changes in the protein expression profiles in the LEC and mouse primary DCs in response to each treatment were generated by employing the ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA; Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA, USA). For network generation, datasets containing gene identifiers (gene symbols) were uploaded into the IPA application together with their rescaled log2 transformation of protein’s area ratios, extracted from label free quantitative (LFQ) MS1 analysis provided by the PEAKS Q module implemented in PEAKS 8.0/8.5.

### Publication Abstract
Tryptophan catabolism is a major metabolic pathway utilized by several professional and non-professional antigen presenting cells to maintain immunological tolerance. Here we report that 3-hydroxy-L-kynurenamine (3-HKA) is a biogenic amine produced via an alternative pathway of tryptophan metabolism. In vitro, 3-HKA has an anti-inflammatory profile by inhibiting the IFN-&#x3b3; mediated STAT1/NF-&#x3ba;&#x392; pathway in both mouse and human dendritic cells (DCs) with a consequent decrease in the release of pro-inflammatory chemokines and cytokines, most notably TNF, IL-6, and IL12p70. 3-HKA has protective effects in an experimental mouse model of psoriasis by decreasing skin thickness, erythema, scaling and fissuring, reducing TNF, IL-1&#x3b2;, IFN-&#x3b3;, and IL-17 production, and inhibiting generation of effector CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. Similarly, in a mouse model of nephrotoxic nephritis, besides reducing inflammatory cytokines, 3-HKA improves proteinuria and serum urea nitrogen, overall ameliorating immune-mediated glomerulonephritis and renal dysfunction. Overall, we propose that this biogenic amine is a crucial component of tryptophan-mediated immune tolerance.

### Keywords
Mouse lymphatic endotehlial cells (lec); mouse primary dendritic cells (pdc); nanolc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Laura Santambrogio Weill Cornell Medicine 1300 York Avenue Room E215 New York, NY 10065 tel 646-962-2160
Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
Cristina Clement

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Santambrogio
Laura Santambrogio Weill Cornell Medicine 1300 York Avenue Room E215 New York, NY 10065 tel 646-962-2160


