### Accession
PXD030565

### Title
Changes in endothelial cell secretome after sirtuin-1 knock-down

### Description
Sirtuin1 (Sirt1) in skeletal muscle (SK) and fat protects against metabolic damage by stimulating insulin sensitivity. Here we report that mice with selective deletion of endothelial Sirt1 (E-Sirt1-KO) paradoxically exhibit heightened whole-body insulin sensitivity. Akt phosphorylation, glucose uptake, and glycolysis are boosted in SK and brown adipose tissue (BAT) of E-Sirt1-KO mice. E-Sirt1-KO mice have higher energy expenditure and are partially protected from high-fat diet-induced insulin resistance. Enhanced insulin sensitivity and peripheral tissue Akt phosphorylation in E-Sirt1-KO mice is transferrable to wild-type mice via the systemic circulation after surgical parabiosis. Silencing of Sirt1 in endothelial cells upregulates transcription of the F-actin-binding protein thymosin beta-4 (Tβ4), whose secretion activates Akt in skeletal myotubes. Sirt1 downregulation stimulates endothelial Tβ4 transcription through inhibition of autophagy and upregulation of nuclear factor-kappa B signaling. Thus, unlike Sirt1 in skeletal muscle and fat, endothelial Sirt1 curtails whole-body insulin sensitivity by inhibiting expression of secreted Tβ4.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation Collected cell culture supernatants (15 mL) were concentrated to 500 μL with 3 kDa cutoff centrifugal filters (Amicon Ultra 4 15 mL version; Sigma-Millipore, Billerica, MA) at 2000xg for 20 min. Next, 500 μL of lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 75 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer; Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) was added to the concentrate and again reduced in the centrifugal filters to 500 μL. This step was repeated once.  The concentrate was transferred into new tubes and reduced with 5 mM DTT at 37°C for 1 h. Then proteins were alkylated with 15 mM freshly prepared iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Iodoacetamide was quenched with 30 mM DTT to prevent protein overalkylation. Proteins were precipitated with a 1:3 ratio of ice-cold (-20°C) mixture of 50% ethanol and 50% acetone in 0.1% acetic acid and stored overnight at -20°C. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation at 14 000xg for 15 min in a cooled centrifuge. The supernatant was carefully discarded, the protein precipitate was dried for 2-3 min and then dissolved in 100 μL 100 mM TEAB buffer pH 8.0 supplemented with 0.1% Rapigest (Sigma-Millipore, Billerica, MA) and 2.5 μg Trypsin-LysC (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA). Samples were digested overnight at 37°C with shaking (850 rpm). Digestion was terminated with 1% formic acid. Peptides were desalted on Oasis HLBcc (30 mg) reversed-phase cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) according to Carr et al. (PMID: 25724909). Cartridges were conditioned three times with 500 μL 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, followed by equilibration with four times of 500 μL 0.1% formic acid. The digests were loaded and washed three times with 750 μL of 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were eluted three times with 500 μL of 0.1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile (Fraction 1) and then a second time with three times of 500 μL of 0.1% formic acid in 70% acetonitrile (Fraction 2). Samples were concentrated to dryness with a vacuum concentrator for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
A Thermo Q Exactive orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and a Waters Nano-Acquity LC system (Waters, Milford MA) acquired MS/MS data from the secretome samples. Fractions 1 and 2 were analyzed separately. Peptide mass fingerprinting and MS/MS search was performed using PatternLab 4.1.0.17 with the build-in Comet search engine (2016.01 rev. 3) against the human protein database (SwissProt reviewed 08/2017). The settings described by Carvalho et al. (PMID: 26658470) were used. Data from the different fractions were combined and analyzed using PatternLab’s SEPro and XIC-Browser. Data were visualized by generating volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sirt1, Huvec, Secretome

### Affiliations
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Abboud Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.  Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes Research Center, Pappajohn Biomedical Institute, and Heart and Vascular Center, University of Iowa, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
Quintara Biosciences

### Submitter
Markus Bachschmid

### Lab Head
Dr Kailkobad Irani
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Abboud Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.  Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes Research Center, Pappajohn Biomedical Institute, and Heart and Vascular Center, University of Iowa, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.


