### Accession
PXD009050

### Title
Proteomic approach and expression analysis revealed the differential expression of leptospiral proteases capable of ECM degradation

### Description
Leptospira, the causative agent of leptospirosis is known to have several proteases with potential to degrade extracellular matrix. However, a multipronged approach to identify, classify, characterize and elucidate their role has not been attempted. In this study, we carried out in-depth proteomic analysis  of  Triton X-114 fractions of Leptospira interrogans using high-resolution LC-MS/MS. Our analysis resulted in the identification of 104 of 130 proteases predicted by MEROPS. Approximately 3.5% of the Leptospira genome complements for proteases, which include catalytic types of metallo-, serine-, cysteine-, aspartic-, threonine- and asparagine- peptidases. Comparison of proteases from different serovars revealed that M04, M09B, M14A, M75, M28A, A01 and U73 protease families are exclusively present in pathogenic form. The M23 and S33 protease families are represented with more than 14 members in Leptospira. In silico prediction and characterization of the proteases revealed that several proteases are membrane anchored and secretory, classical as well as non-classical system. This study demonstrates the diversity and complexity of proteases, while maintaining conservation across the serovars in Leptospira and their differential expression under pathogenic conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Leptospira interrogans serovar Copenhageni strain Fiocruz L1-130 was cultured in Ellinghausen-McCullough-Johnson-Harris (EMJH) medium, supplemented with 1 % BSA at 30 °C. The mid log phase culture was harvested by centrifuging at 2,500 × g for 30 min at 4 °C and washing with PBS containing 5 mM MgCl2. The pellet was lysed and the protein was extracted using 10 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8) containing 1 % Triton X-114 and 150 mM NaCl at 4 °C. The Triton X-114 concentration of the supernatant was further increased to 2 % (v/v), mixed well and incubated at 37 °C for one hour for phase separation. The upper aqueous and lower detergent phases were separated and designated as “aqueous” and “detergent” phase respectively. The pellet from the Triton X-114 extract was further extracted with buffer containing 10 mM TRIS-Cl (pH8), 8 M urea, 4 mM DTT and 1 % SDS and centrifuged to separate the undissolved precipitate and the supernatant was designated as “pellet fraction”. 100 µg proteins from each fraction were precipitated using chilled acetone, dissolved in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4 lysis buffer. The protein lysate was resolved using SDS-PAGE and in-gel digestion was carried out. The detergent fraction was also subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion followed by fractionation using basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography. The fractions obtained were desalted using C18 StageTips. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Easy-nLC1200 nano-flow UHPLC (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files obtained from mass spectrometry analysis were processed using Proteome Discoverer software version 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and searched using SEQUEST and Mascot search algorithms against Leptospira interrogans serogroup Icterohaemorrhagiae serovar copenhageni (strain Fiocruz L1-130) obtained from NCBI (3,667 protein entries). The search parameters included trypsin as the protease with a maximum of 1 missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine Oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. The peptide matches that qualifies 1% false discovery rate (FDR) were considered as true identification that was calculated using Percolator node.

### Publication Abstract
The Triton X-114-based solubilization and temperature-dependent phase separation of proteins is used for subcellular fractionation where, aqueous, detergent, and pellet fractions represents cytoplasmic, outer membrane (OM), and inner membrane proteins, respectively. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of Triton X-114 fractions of proteomic analysis of Leptospira interrogans identified 2957 unique proteins distributed across the fractions. The results are compared with bioinformatics predictions on their subcellular localization and pathogenic nature. Analysis of the distribution of proteins across the Triton X-114 fractions with the predicted characteristics is performed based on "number" of unique type of proteins, and "quantity" which represents the amount of unique protein. The highest number of predicted outer membrane proteins (OMPs) and pathogenic proteins are found in aqueous and pellet fractions, whereas detergent fraction representing the OM has the highest quantity of OMPs and pathogenic proteins though lower in number than the aqueous and pellet fractions. This leaves the possibility of an upsurge in pathogenic proteins and OMPs on the OM under pathogenic conditions suggesting their potential use to combat leptospirosis. Further, the Triton X-114 subcellular fractions are more correlated to enrichment of pathogenic proteins predicted by MP3 software than predicted localization.

### Keywords
Protease, Pathogenesis, High resolution proteomics, Metalloprotease, Leptospira

### Affiliations
Indian Council of Medical Research, Regional Medical Research Centre
Regional Medical Research Centre, Indian Council of Medical Research, Port Blair, India

### Submitter
Madathiparambil G.  Madanan

### Lab Head
Dr M. G. Madanan
Regional Medical Research Centre, Indian Council of Medical Research, Port Blair, India


