### Accession
PXD042560

### Title
A putative glucose 6-phosphate isomerase has pleiotropic effects including virulence on Acidovorax citrulli

### Description
- Identification of proteins whose expression was affected by a putative glucose 6-phosphate isomerase in Acidovorax citrulli str. KACC17005 - Shotgun proteomic analysis was used -  Two strains were used with three biological replicates (total 6 samples). WT_4C: the wild-type strain. 4C: 2, a putative glucose 6-phosphate isomerase knockout mutant

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, WT and 4C strains were used, and a label-free shotgun comparative proteomic approach was carried out using a previously reported protocol (Park et al., 2020b). Briefly, Ac strains were grown in TSB and harvested at an OD600 of 0.5 by centrifugation. The harvested cells were disrupted by an Ultrasonic Processor (Colo Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL, USA). Total proteins were concentrated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation and digested by trypsin. After cleaning the tryptic-digested proteins using the Sep-Pak Vac 1cc tC18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), peptide concentration was determined using a BCA assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). One μg of each sample (two strains with three biological replicates) was injected into a split-free nano LC (EASY-nLC II; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) combined with an LTQ Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by the nanospray ion mode. Tryptic-digested peptides were loaded onto a 7.5 cm of MAGIC C18AQ 200A (5 µm) (Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA, USA) with 300 nL/min flow rate for 420 min under water/acetonitrile gradient using buffer A (water with 0.1% formic acid) buffer B (100% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). For the mass spectra, six of data-dependent MS/MS scans with m/z 300-2000 range of mass were used. Dynamic exclusion was allowed under one repeat, 0.5 min duration, and 3 min exclusion. The ion charge state selection was permitted for 2+ and 3+. From the full mass scan, six of the most intense ions were chosen.

### Data Protocol
- Mass spectrometry analysis A total of 6 biological samples, including three biological replicates, were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Each sample (2 µg) was analyzed on a split-free nano LC device (EASY-nLC II; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to an LTQ Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) via the nanospray ion mode. The digested samples were separated by a column packed in-house with 7.5 cm of MAGIC C18AQ 200A (5 µm) material (Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA, USA). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using a 420 min water/ACN gradient (Solvent A, water with 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B, 100% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) as follows: 5 min 7% B, 380 min gradient to 35% B, and 10 min to 80% B, with a final hold at 7% B for 25 min. Full mass spectra were acquired in six data-dependent MS/MS scans over a mass range of m/z 300–2000. Dynamic exclusion was allowed with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 0.5 min, and exclusion duration of 3.0 min, with charge state selection enabled to preferentially select 2+ and 3+ ions. Peptides were transferred with a 1.8 kV spray voltage and a desolvation capillary temperature of 200 °C. Up to six of the most intense ions in each full MS scan were consecutively collected for fragmentation and examined in centroid mode within the linear ion trap part of the instrument.  - Protein/peptide identification Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (ver. 1.3.0.399) with the SEQUEST search algorithm was used for interpretation of acquired MS/MS spectra. The spectra were searched against Acidovorax citrulli strain KACC17005databases from the National Center for Biotechnology Information. A target-decoy search was employed to enhance the confidence of correct identification. Trypsin was set as the enzyme, and two missed cleavages were permitted. All accepted Acidovorax citrulli eptides had a false discovery rate of 0.01 with reversed database searches, and precursor mass accuracies of 100 ppm. In addition, the probability scores of all peptides were over 20. The oxidation of methionine was fixed as a possible modification. Proteins that matched at least two unique peptides were considered to be present in the sample. Then, the identified proteins were re-imported into Scaffold 4 (Proteome software, Portland, OR, USA) for visualization and comparison of the proteomics data. After removing decoy proteins, peptide spectrum match (PSM) was used for comparative analysis. PSMs from each protein were normalized against the total PSMs from all proteins in a sample. Proteins shared among the three biological replicates were used for comparison. The average of normalized PSMs in the three biological replicates was calculated per protein and used as a comparison value to identify differentially (over 2-fold) expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Acidovorax citrulli</i> (<i>Ac</i>) is a causal agent of watermelon bacterial fruit blotch (BFB) disease. Because resistance cultivars/lines have not yet been developed, it is imperative to elucidate <i>Ac</i>'s virulence factors and their mechanisms to develop resistant cultivars/lines in different crops, including watermelon. The glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI) is a reversible enzyme in both glycolysis and gluconeogenesis pathways in living organisms. However, the functions of GPI are not characterized in <i>Ac</i>. In this study, we determined the roles of GpiAc (GPI in <i>Ac</i>) by proteomic and phenotypic analyses of the mutant lacking GPI. The mutant displayed significantly reduced virulence to watermelon in two different virulence assays. The mutant's growth patterns were comparable to the wild-type strain in rich medium and M9 with glucose but not with fructose. The comparative proteome analysis markedly identified proteins related to virulence, motility, and cell wall/membrane/envelope. In the mutant, biofilm formation and twitching halo production were reduced. We further demonstrated that the mutant was less tolerant to osmotic stress and lysozyme treatment than the wild-type strain. Interestingly, the tolerance to alkali conditions was remarkably enhanced in the mutant. These results reveal that GpiAc is involved not only in virulence and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis but also in biofilm formation, twitching motility, and tolerance to diverse external stresses suggesting the pleiotropic roles of GpiAc in <i>Ac</i>. Our study provides fundamental and valuable information on the functions of previously uncharacterized glucose 6-phosphate isomerase and its virulence mechanism in <i>Ac</i>.

### Keywords
Glucose 6-phosphate isomerase, Acidovorax citrulli

### Affiliations
Chung-Ang University
Department of Plant Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University, Anseong 17546, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Sang-Wook Han

### Lab Head
Dr Sang-Wook Han
Department of Plant Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University, Anseong 17546, Republic of Korea


