### Accession
PXD029827

### Title
In-depth characterization of the Clostridioides difficile phosphoproteome to identify Ser/Thr kinases substrates

### Description
Clostridioides difficile is the leading cause of intestinal nosocomial post-antibiotic infections in adults. During infection, the bacterium must rapidly respond and adapt to the host environment by using survival strategies. Protein phosphorylation is a reversible post-translational modification employed ubiquitously for signal transduction and cellular regulation. Recently, Hanks-type Serine/Threonine kinases (STKs) and phosphatases (STPs), have emerged as important players in bacterial cell signaling and pathogenicity. However, characterization of STKs targets in prokaryotes remained a difficult challenge. Here, we applied and adapted the TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment approach to determine the phosphoproteome of C. difficile. We have identified and quantified 2497 proteins representing 63,1% of the theoretical proteome. Among these proteins, 649 contained phosphorylated peptides with a localization probability >0,75. This pathogen encodes two STKs (PrkC and CD2148) and one associated phosphatase (STP), PrkC was shown to be crucial in the regulation of cell wall homeostasis, antibiotic resistance and cell division. Comparative phosphoproteomics of wild-type, prkC, CD2148, stp and double prkC CD2148 strains were performed in order to determinate STKs targets. 104 proteins were identified as specific substrates of PrkC, 46 of CD2148 and 94 of both kinases. Using a combination of in vivo and in vitro approaches, FtsK and Spo0A were validated as a direct target of PrkC. This study provides a detailed mapping of kinase-substrate relationships which may aid in the identification of new biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
C. difficile strains were routinely grown at 37°C in an anaerobic environment (90% N2, 5% CO2, and 5% H2) in TY (Bacto tryptone 30 g/L, yeast extract 20 g/L, pH 7.4) or in BHI (Difco). Bacterial pellets were resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 50 mM DTT, 4% SDS, 1% DNase I, 1X protease and phosphatase inhibitors and disrupted by ultrasonic cavitation. Protein digestion was based on the modified Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) procedure using 30K Amicon Ultra-4 filtration devices (Millipore). Reduction and alkylatin were performed using 5 mM TCEP, 30 mM chloroacetamide, 0.3% benzonase, 0.1% DNase I and 1 mM MgCl2 during 1h30 at RT. After an overnight digestion with trypsin, resulting peptides were desalted with Sep-Pak plus C18 cartridge (Waters) and eluted with 80% ACN, 0.1 % heptafluorobutyric acid (HFBA, Sigma-Aldrich) then adjusted at 6 % HFBA. TiO2 beads (Sachtopore NP beads 5 µM, 300 Å – Huntsman) were resuspended at 20 mg/mL in 30% ACN, 0.1 % HFBA during 1 h and then activated 15 min with 80% ACN / 6% HFBA. Peptide solution was incubated for 30 min at RT with TiO2 ratio 10:1 (bead:peptide). Two washes with the same buffer and one with 50% ACN, 0.1% HFBA were performed before an elution with 10% NH4OH. pH was neutralized with 20% FA and enriched peptides were freeze-dried. Finally, phospho-peptides were desalted by stage-tip using C18 Empore disc and dried in a Speed-Vac. Peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN / 0.1% FA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled with an EASY nLC 1200 chromatography system.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched Maxquant software version 1.5.3.8 with Andromeda as a search engine against an internal C. difficile database containing 3,957 protein, usual known mass spectrometry contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. Andromeda searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of three missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), oxidation (Met, variable), Nter acetylation (variable) and phospho (Ser, Thr, Tyr, variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 4.5 ppm for the main search and 20 ppm for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to seven and seven amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The “match between runs” feature was applied for samples having the same experimental condition with a maximal retention time window of 0.7 min. One unique peptide by protein group was required for protein quantification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. For in-gel analysis, we used the Phospho (STY) table to extract the intensity of each phospho-peptide. A normalization step based on the iBAQ of the protein in each sample was performed before relative quantification. The MaxLFQ algorithm was used to provide quantified values for unmodified proteins (i.e. proteins quantified from their identified and unmodified peptides). Statistical analysis were performed using R packages.

### Publication Abstract
Clostridioides difficile is the leading cause of postantibiotic diarrhea in adults. During infection, the bacterium must rapidly adapt to the host environment by using survival strategies. Protein phosphorylation is a reversible post-translational modification employed ubiquitously for signal transduction and cellular regulation. Hanks-type serine/threonine kinases (STKs) and serine/threonine phosphatases have emerged as important players in bacterial cell signaling and pathogenicity. C. difficile encodes two STKs (PrkC and CD2148) and one phosphatase. We optimized a titanium dioxide phosphopeptide enrichment approach to determine the phosphoproteome of C. difficile. We identified and quantified 2500 proteins representing 63% of the theoretical proteome. To identify STK and serine/threonine phosphatase targets, we then performed comparative large-scale phosphoproteomics of the WT strain and isogenic &#x394;prkC, CD2148, &#x394;stp, and prkC CD2148 mutants. We detected 635 proteins containing phosphorylated peptides. We showed that PrkC is phosphorylated on multiple sites in vivo and autophosphorylates in vitro. We were unable to detect a phosphorylation for CD2148 in vivo, whereas this kinase was phosphorylated in vitro only in the presence of PrkC. Forty-one phosphoproteins were identified as phosphorylated under the control of CD2148, whereas 114 proteins were phosphorylated under the control of PrkC including 27 phosphoproteins more phosphorylated in the &#x2206;stp mutant. We also observed enrichment for phosphothreonine among the phosphopeptides more phosphorylated in the &#x394;stp mutant. Both kinases targeted pathways required for metabolism, translation, and stress response, whereas cell division and peptidoglycan metabolism were more specifically controlled by PrkC-dependent phosphorylation in agreement with the phenotypes of the &#x394;prkC mutant. Using a combination of approaches, we confirmed that FtsK was phosphorylated in vivo under the control of PrkC and that Spo0A was a substrate of PrkC in vitro. This study provides a detailed mapping of kinase-substrate relationships in C. difficile, paving the way for the identification of new biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Kinase, Clostridium difficile, Qexactive hf

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur
Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, CNRS USR2000, Proteomics Platform, Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit, 75015 Paris, France

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Mariette Matondo
Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, CNRS USR2000, Proteomics Platform, Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit, 75015 Paris, France


