### Accession
PXD008898

### Title
Quantitative analysis of large-scale proteomic changes in LPS-activated monocyte-derived dendritic cells: A SWATH-MS study

### Description
Determination of global alterations in monocyte-derived dendritic cells in response to stimulation with lipopolysaccharide using SWATH-MS to provide insight into cellular mechanism driving dendritic cell maturation

### Sample Protocol
Monocytes were isolated and cultured from blood of healthy donors. After maturation dendritic cells were harvested at 0h, 6h and 24h after LPS treatment and lysed. Proteins were reduced/alkylated, tryptic digested and desalted. Protein identification and SWATH measurements were performed by LC-MS/MS on a TripleTof 5600+

### Data Protocol
Protein Pilot using Protein Pilot v5.0.1 against human Swissprot database. Identified proteins with a 1% false detection rate (FDR) at the global protein level were imported into Skyline for spectral library generation and SWATH-MS analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Dendritic cells are key immune cells that respond to pathogens and co-ordinate many innate and adaptive immune responses. Quantitative mass spectrometry using Sequential Window Acquisition of all THeoretical fragment-ion spectra-Mass Spectrometry (SWATH-MS) was performed here to determine the global alterations in monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs) in response to stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). A moDC library of 4,666 proteins was generated and proteins were quantified at 0, 6 and 24&#x2009;h post-LPS stimulation using SWATH-MS. At 6&#x2009;h and 24&#x2009;h post-LPS exposure, the relative abundance of 227 and 282 proteins was statistically significantly altered (p-value&#x2009;&#x2264;&#x2009;0.05), respectively. Functional annotation of proteins exhibiting significant changes in expression between the various time points led to the identification of clusters of proteins implicated in distinct cellular processes including interferon and interleukin signalling, endocytosis, the ER-phagosome pathway and antigen-presentation. In SWATH-MS major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I proteins were highly upregulated at 24&#x2009;h, whilst MHC class II proteins exhibited comparatively fewer&#xa0;changes over this period. This study provides new detailed insight into the global proteomic changes that occur in moDCs during antigen processing and presentation and further demonstrates the potential of SWATH-MS for the quantitative study of proteins involved in cellular processes.

### Keywords
Antigen presentation, Dendritic cell maturation, Quantitative proteomics, Lipopolysaccharide, Leukocyte metabolism

### Affiliations
University of St Andrews
School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9TF, UK

### Submitter
Silvia Synowsky

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Alan James Stewart
School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9TF, UK


