### Accession
PXD029678

### Title
Label-free global phosphoproteomics experiment using PI3K-AKT-mTOR-S6K and RAF-MEK-ERK-RSK pathway activation and inhibition

### Description
The signaling network of skeletal muscle cells is controlled by a variety of protein kinases. Although many kinases are known players, their downstream targets are still largely unexplored. To gain further knowledge about the PI3K-AKT-mTOR-S6K and the RAF-MEK-ERK-RSK signaling networks in myotubes, we analyzed changes in protein phosphorylation levels upon pathway activation and direct kinase inhibition on a global scale. Based on the phosphoproteomics data, we further examined target relationships of the basophilic kinases AKT, RSK and S6K, which share the substrate recognition motif RxRxxp[ST].

### Sample Protocol
C2 myoblasts were grown in DMEM GlutaMAX supplemented with 15% FCS, 2% sodium pyruvate and 1% NEAA. At 90-95% confluence, C2 cells were differentiated into myotubes, starved for serum and treated with EPS for 3 h. Prior to cell lysis, cells were stimulated with IGF-1 (10 ng/ml) for 30 min or EGF (10 ng/ml) for 15 min. MK-2206 (10 µM, 30 min), PF-4708671 (10 µM, 30 min) and BI-D1870 (10 µM, 15 min) were used for AKT, S6K and RSK inhibition, respectively. Cells were lysed and processed according to the EasyPhos protocol (Humphrey et al., Nat. Protoc., 2018). In brief, 4% sodium deoxycholate in 100 mM Tris-buffer, pH 8.5, was used for cell lysis, protein disulfide bonds were reduced and alkylated, followed by protein digestion using trypsin and LysC (enzyme:protein ratio, 1:100). Afterwards, phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 and supernatants obeyed after EasyPhos were enriched with Fe(III)-IMAC using SMOAC (Choi et al., at 65th ASMS Conference on Mass Spectrometry and Allied Topics, 2017). Eluates from phosphopeptide enrichment were desalted and pooled for MS analysis on a Q Exactive Plus.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were subjected to database search using Andromeda embedded in MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 using an in silico tryptic digest of a Mus musculus proteome from the UniProt sequence database (June 2020, 63,722 entries). MaxQuant database search was performed using the following parameters: variable modifications, S/T/Y phosphorylation, M oxidation and N-term acetylation; fixed modification, C carbamidomethylation; first search mass tolerance, 20 ppm; FDR, 1%; precursor ion mass tolerance, 4.5 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin/P; peptide charge states, +1 to +7; "match between runs", enabled; max. missed cleavages, two; min. unique peptides, one; max. modifications per peptide, five; matching time window, 0.7 min. Phosphosites with a MaxQuant localization probability of ≥ 0.75 were defined reliably localized and used for further analysis. The intensity ratios of all localized sites were analyzed statistically at the log2-scale. A linear model was applied to jointly estimate inhibitor treatment effects. FDRs were calculated using the Benjamini and Hochberg step-up procedure.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation-dependent signal transduction plays an important role in regulating the functions and fate of skeletal muscle cells. Central players in the phospho-signaling network are the protein kinases AKT, S6K, and RSK as part of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR-S6K and RAF-MEK-ERK-RSK pathways. However, despite their functional importance, knowledge about their specific targets is incomplete because these kinases share the same basophilic substrate motif RxRxx<i>p</i>[ST]. To address this, we performed a multifaceted quantitative phosphoproteomics study of skeletal myotubes following kinase inhibition. Our data corroborate a cross talk between AKT and RAF, a negative feedback loop of RSK on ERK, and a putative connection between RSK and PI3K signaling. Altogether, we report a kinase target landscape containing 49 so far unknown target sites. AKT, S6K, and RSK phosphorylate numerous proteins involved in muscle development, integrity, and functions, and signaling converges on factors that are central for the skeletal muscle cytoskeleton. Whereas AKT controls insulin signaling and impinges on GTPase signaling, nuclear signaling is characteristic for RSK. Our data further support a role of RSK in glucose metabolism. Shared targets have functions in RNA maturation, stability, and translation, which suggests that these basophilic kinases establish an intricate signaling network to orchestrate and regulate processes involved in translation.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Mouse, Ms, S6k, Akt, Rsk, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


