### Accession
PXD037236

### Title
Lung extracellular matrix modulates KRT5+ basal cell activity in pulmonary fibrosis

### Description
Aberrant expansion of KRT5+ basal cells in the distal lung accompanies progressive alveolar epithelial cell loss and tissue remodelling during fibrogenesis in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). The mechanisms determining activity of KRT5+ cells in IPF have not been delineated. Here, we show an association between KRT5+ cells in human fibrotic lung and regional differences in collagen topography. In vitro, KRT5+ cell migratory characteristics and expression of remodelling genes are modulated by extracellular matrix (ECM) composition and organisation. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics revealed compositional differences in the matrisome secreted by primary human lung fibroblasts (HLF) from IPF patients compared to controls. Over-expression of ECM glycoprotein, Secreted Protein Acidic and Cysteine Rich (SPARC) in the IPF HLF matrisome restricts KRT5+ cell migration in vitro. Together, our findings demonstrate that changes to the ECM in IPF directly influence KRT5+ cell behaviour and function contributing to remodelling events in the fibrotic niche.

### Sample Protocol
A method developed by Lennon et al (2014) was used to reduce the complexity of protein samples for MS analysis by removing cellular components and enriching for ECM proteins. All steps were carried out at 4°C to minimise proteolysis. Primary HLFs from 6 donors (n = 3 controls, n = 3 IPF) were cultured in a 10cm2 petri dish and maintained for 21 days in DMEM (Gibco) and 10% FBS to allow matrix deposition. Following a PBS wash, the cells were incubated for 30 minutes in extraction buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1% [vol/vol] Triton X-100, 25mMEDTA, protease inhibitor) to solubilise cellular proteins, and samples were then centrifuged at 14,000xg for 10 minutes. The remaining pellet was incubated for 30 minutes in alkaline detergent buffer (20 mM NH4OH and 0.5% [vol/vol] Triton X-100 in PBS) to further solubilise cellular proteins and disrupt cell–ECM interactions. Samples were then centrifuged at 14,000xg for 10 minutes. The remaining pellet was resuspended in S trap lysis buffer (5% SDS with 50 mM TEAB pH 7.5) and transferred to a 130 µl AFA tube (Covaris Inc, Woburn, USA,Covaris) to yield the ECM fraction. The lysate was further solubilised using AFA sonication in a Covaris LE220+ (Woburn, Massachusetts). Sample were disrupted for 300s, with 50 cycles per burst, a duty factor of 20% and a peak incident power of 500W. The resulting ECM-enriched fractions were reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated for 10 minutes at 60°C to reduce the cysteine bonds. The samples were then alkylated in 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 30 minutes (in the dark). The alkylation reaction was finally quenched using 5 mM DTT. Aqueous phosphoric acid was added to the SDS lysates to a final concentration of 1.2% then S-Trap binding buffer (90% MeOH, 100 mM final TEAB, pH 7.1) was mixed with the acidified protein lysates. The acidified lysate/S-Trap buffer mix was loaded onto the S-Trap column. The captured proteins were washed centrifuging through 150 μl of S-Trap binding buffer at 4,000 g for 2 min and repeated three times. The proteins were digested by adding trypsin at a ratio of 1:10 wt:wt (enzyme:protein) to the top of the protein trap and incubated in an Eppendorf Thermomixer for 1 hr at 47°C. The peptides were eluted with 65 μl of digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB) from the S-Trap column and centrifuged at 4,000 g for 2 minutes then 65 μl of 0.1% aqueous formic acid (FA) was added and centrifuged at 4,000 g for 2 minutes. The remaining hydrophobic peptides were eluted with 30 μl of 30% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged at 4,000 g for 2 minutes. All three elutions were combined and peptides were desalted using 1 mg of R3 beads which were placed in each well of a 96 well plate with 0.2 um PVDF membrane. R3 beads were washed with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile followed by 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. Peptide samples were then resuspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to allow peptide binding to beads, washed twice with 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, and peptides eluted in 50 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were desiccated in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 10 μl of 5% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a QE HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and the column used was a 75 mm x 250 μm i.d. 1.7μM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). A 1μl aliquot of the sample was transferred to a 5μl loop and loaded onto the column at a flow of 300nl/min for 5 minutes at 5% B. The loop was then taken out of line and the peptides separated using a gradient that went from 5% to 7% B and from 300nl/min to 200nl/min in 1 minute followed by a shallow gradient from 7% to 18% B in 64 minutes, then from 18% to 27% B in 8 minutes and finally from 27% B to 60% B in 1 minute. The column was washed at 60% B for 3 minutes before re-equilibration to 5% B in 1 minutes. At 85 minutes the flow is increased to 300nl/min until the end of the run at 90min.   Mass spectrometry data was acquired in a data directed manner for 90 minutes in positive mode. Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis on a basis of the top 12 peptides with m/z between 300 to 1750Th and a charge state of 2, 3 or 4 with a dynamic exclusion set at 15 sec. The MS Resolution was set at 120,000 with an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum fill time set at 20ms. The MS2 Resolution was set to 30,000, with an AGC target of 2e5, a maximum fill time of 45 ms, isolation window of 1.3Th and a collision energy of 28.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were imported into Proteome Discoverer v2.4.1.15 SP1 (PD) (Thermo Scientific), a program that integrates all the different steps in a quantitative proteomics experiment (including MS/MS spectrum extraction, peptide identification and quantification) into automated workflows.  The data were analysed using the standard Sequest™ HT-Percolator workflow and the default consensus workflow for label-free quantification. The Sequest HT search was performed against the Homo sapiens database (SwissProt and TrEMBL version 2017-10-25, taxonomy 9606, 42252 and 124124 sequences respectively).

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant expansion of KRT5<sup>+</sup> basal cells in the distal lung accompanies progressive alveolar epithelial cell loss and tissue remodelling during fibrogenesis in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). The mechanisms determining activity of KRT5<sup>+</sup> cells in IPF have not been delineated. Here, we reveal a potential mechanism by which KRT5<sup>+</sup> cells migrate within the fibrotic lung, navigating regional differences in collagen topography. In vitro, KRT5<sup>+</sup> cell migratory characteristics and expression of remodelling genes are modulated by extracellular matrix (ECM) composition and organisation. Mass spectrometry- based proteomics revealed compositional differences in ECM components secreted by primary human lung fibroblasts (HLF) from IPF patients compared to controls. Over-expression of ECM glycoprotein, Secreted Protein Acidic and Cysteine Rich (SPARC) in the IPF HLF matrix restricts KRT5<sup>+</sup> cell migration in vitro. Together, our findings demonstrate how changes to the ECM in IPF directly influence KRT5<sup>+</sup> cell behaviour and function contributing to remodelling events in the fibrotic niche.

### Keywords
Human, Lung, Fibrosis, Ecm

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK

### Submitter
Maryline Fresquet

### Lab Head
Dr Clare Lloyd
National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK


