### Accession
PXD028508

### Title
Liquid chromatograph-mass spectrometry based on the iTRAQ approach identified the differentially expressed proteins of two different drought-resistant maize varieties under moderate drought stress conditions and explained the physiological response mechanisms

### Description
Drought stress, especially during the seedling stage, seriously limits the growth and development of maize. Understanding the response of maize to drought is the first step in the breeding of tolerant genotypes. Recent advances in deep-sequencing and proteomic techniques, such as isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ), can provide large-scale comparisons and reliable quantitative measurements. Despite previous studies on drought resistance mechanisms by which maize cope with water deficient, the link between physiological and molecular variations are largely unknown. Therefore, understanding the drought tolerance mechanisms of different maize varieties is essential for genetic manipulation and/or cross breeding in maize. Towards this goal, we used a comparative physiological and proteomics analysis approach to monitor the changes of two different drought-resistant maize varieties.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, trypsin digestion and iTRAQ labeling-Briefly, the samples grinded in liquid nitrogen were harvested to a 5-mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz), then lysed with lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, and 1% protease PMSF (Beyotime)). The lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4℃ for 30 min. The protein level in the supernatant was quantified with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For trypsin and iTRAQ labeling, the protein solution from each sample was reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 min, alkylated by 25 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark, and then digested with 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio overnight and 1:100 for a second 4 h-digestion. The digested samples were incubated for 2h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation, then labeled with iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer's instructions.  HPLC Fractionation and LC-MS/MS Analysis-iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Waters Bridge Peptide BEH C18 (130 Å, 3.5 μm, 4.6*250 mm). Peptides were first distributed into 60 fractions using a gradient of 2% to 98% acetonitrile over 88 min. Then, the peptides were reconstituted into 12 fractions, concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, and the tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column. The gradient contained 0.1% formic acid with an increase from 5% to 45% over 58 min, climbing to 80% in 2 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on an ultimate system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source for LC-MS/MS analysis, which was performed on a Q Exactive HF coupled to UPLC. The m/z scan range was 400 to 2000 for full scan, 60,000 resolution for intact peptides. Ion fragments were detected at a resolution of 15,000 and the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent decision tree-based ion trap higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at the collision energy of 27% above a threshold ion count of 1e5 in the MS survey scan with 20.0s dynamic exclusion. Full width at half maximum (FHMW) at 400 m/z is used coupled with an automatic gain control (AGC) setting at 1e6 ions and fixed first mass at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification-The resulting MS/MS raw data were converted to mgf format profile with the software mascot 2.3.02 (matrix science). Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), acetylation in N-Term were set as variable modification. The searches were performed using a peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 0.05 Da, resulting in 0.05 false discovery rate (FDR).  Identified proteins that differed between stressed and non-stressed plants with a fold change >1.50 or <0.67 (P < 0.05) were defined as significant differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). The gene ontology enrichment analysis and KEGG pathway enrichment were performed using the agriGO (http://systemsbiology.cau.edu.cn/agriGOv2/) and KEGG database (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/), respectively. Only the GO terms or KEGG pathways with P-value less than 0.05 can be defined as statistically significant. Protein interaction network was constructed using the STRING database (https://string-db.org/) and Cytoscape 3.7.2 software. The interaction proteins were shown with a combined score higher than 0.5. The protein subcellular localization prediction was used WoLFPSORT (https://www.genscript.com/psort/wolf_psort.html). Statistical analysis-The physiological assay and qRT-PCR results were analyzed by SigmaPlot 11.0 software. Significant differences between the controls and treatments were determined by Tukey’s tests at significance level P < 0.05. Bioinformatic analysis and graphics were performed with the R package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maize; itraq; drought tolerance; photosynthesis

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi, Yangling 712100, China.
Mhelix coompany

### Submitter
qiu siqi

### Lab Head
Dr Renhe Zhang
College of Agronomy, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi, Yangling 712100, China.


