### Accession
PXD020151

### Title
Biliary Tract Carcinogenesis Model Based on Bile Metaproteomics

### Description
Purpose: To analyze human and bacteria proteomic profiles in bile, exposed to a tumor vs. non-tumor microenvironment, in order to identify differences between these conditions, which may contribute to a better understanding of pancreatic carcinogenesis.  Patients and Methods: Using liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry, human and bacteria proteomic profiles of a total of 20 bile samples (7 from gallstone (GS) patients, and 13 from pancreatic head ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) patients) that were collected during surgery, and taken directly from the gallbladder were compared. g:Profiler and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) Mapper Reconstruct Pathway was used as the main comparative platform focusing on over-represented biological pathways among human proteins and interaction pathways among bacterial proteins. Results: Three bacterial infection pathways were over-represented in the human PDAC group of proteins. IL-8 is the only human protein that coincides in the three pathways and this protein is only present in the PDAC group. Quantitative and qualitative differences in bacterial proteins suggest a dysbiotic microenvironment in the PDAC group, supported by significant participation of antibiotic biosynthesis enzymes. Prokaryote interaction signaling pathways highlight the presence of zeatin in the GS group and surfactin in the PDAC group, the former in the metabolism of terpenoids and polyketides, and the latter in both metabolisms of terpenoids, polyketides and quorum sensing. Based on our findings, we propose a bacterial-induced carcinogenesis model for the biliary tract. Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge this is the first study with the aim of comparing human and bacteria bile proteins in a tumor vs. non-tumor microenvironment. We proposed a new carcinogenesis model for the biliary tract based on bile metaproteomic findings. Our results suggest that bacteria may be key players in biliary tract carcinogenesis, in a long-lasting dysbiotic and epithelially harmful microenvironment, in which specific bacterial species biofilm formation is of utmost importance. Our finding should be further explored in future using in vitro and in vivo investigations

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analyses  Proteomic analysis was performed by Creative Proteomics (Ramsey Road, Shirley, NY 11967, USA), briefly, the techniques used are described as follows:   Sample preparation for proteomic analysis.  Total proteins were precipitated from the protein solution using methanol and chloroform.  Approximately 10 μg of total protein was dissolved in 6 M urea aqueous solution and was denatured with 10 mM DL-dithiothreitol, incubated at 56°C for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide, and incubated for 60 min at room temperature, protected from light. Next, 500 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) was added to the solution to make a final concentration of 50 mM ABC with a pH of 7.8. Promega Trypsin was added to the protein solution for digestion at 37 °C for 15 h.  The generated peptides were further purified with the C18 SPE column (Thermo Scientific) to remove salt. Samples were dried in a vacufuge and stored at −20 °C until use.   Nano liquid chromatography   An Easy-nLC1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) coupled to a 100 μm× 10 cm in-house made column packed with a reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) was used. A sample volume of 5 μL was loaded, with a total flow rate of 600 nL/min, and a mobile phase of A: 0.1% formic acid in water; and B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The analytical separation was run using a gradient: from 6% to 9% B for 15 min, from 9% to 14% B for 20 min, from 14% to 30% B for 60 min, from 30% to 40% B for 15 min and from 40% to 95% B for 3 min, eluting with 95% B for 7 min.   Mass spectrometry and data analysis  An Orbitrap Q Exactive™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) set on a spray voltage of 2.2 kV and a capillary temperature of 270 °C was used. Mass spectrometry resolution was set to 70000 at 400 m/z and precursor m/z range: between 300.0-1800.0. The production scan range starts from m/z 100, activated by collision-induced dissociation (CID), and an isolation width of 3.00. The raw files were analyzed and searched against the human protein database from Uniprot using Maxquant (1.5.6.5). The parameters were set as follows: the protein modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) (fixed), oxidation (M) (variable); the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin; the maximum missed cleavages was set to 2; the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da.

### Data Protocol
Human and bacteria peptide-protein list selection for analysis   Peptide-protein analysis was performed at ICMT-CES University. Contaminants, albumin, hemoglobin related peptides, and peptides with zero intensity were eliminated from the full human and bacteria list of peptides-proteins. The identifiers of protein were standardized, missing gene names were manually completed and protein taxonomy was verified. Then, the full list of shared proteins was adapted to meet the requirements of the Prostar platform online version 1.18.1, seeking for differentially abundant human and bacterial proteins among groups (GS vs PDAC). The intensity values were normalized with the mean centering method without including variance reduction. Partially observed values were imputed using the SLSA (Structured Least Squares Adaptive) method. The hypothesis test was performed using the Student´s t-test, considering a logarithmic change of 2.5 and adjusting the false discovery rate to 0.42% (p-value= 0.00316). The biological validity of impute non-existent values in non-observed proteins, in order to compare the exclusive list of proteins among groups, was explored. However, we choose to perform the analysis based only on observed values in the two groups, GS and PDAC (shared proteins). For further qualitative analysis, all the human protein lists of the complete, exclusive and differentially abundant proteins from GS and PDAC patients, were included in the retrieve ID/mapping module of the Universal Protein consortium resource (Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/, UniProt release 2019_10). Then, in order to provide mechanistic insights into the biological integrated function, Uniprot standardized human protein lists of entries for each group were analyzed in the g:Profiler web page (https://biit.cs.ut.ee/gprofiler/gost). g:Profiler allows a multi-query approach, which performs an over-representation functional analysis of multiple protein-gene lists, comparing proteins among groups. Default options were maintained in g:Profiler, adding no electronic gene ontology annotations, and Bonferroni correction for multiple test adjustments. Significant, adjusted, over-represented pathways (p- values < 0.01), were used for further analysis in the KEGG Mapper Reconstruct Pathway. KEGG identifiers were obtained from the Uniprot FASTA file of the complete, exclusive, and differentially abundant protein list, through BlastKoala (KEGG Orthology And Links Annotation version 2.2 https://www.kegg.jp/blastkoala/). KEGG Mapper Reconstruct Pathway allows visualization and comparison of proteins in signaling pathways to identify qualitative and quantitative differences without coupled statistical analysis. (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/tool/map_pathway.html). On the other hand, useful drugs were explored using the functional database “DrugBank” through WebGestalt (WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit updated on 01/14/2019 http://www.webgestalt.org/), by performing an over-representation analysis (ORA), using the database Drugbank and setting the false discovery rate at <0.01 with Bonferroni correction for multiple test adjustments. The biological context was analyzed as a whole in the complete protein groups by correlating findings with the specific proteins identified for each condition. Many biological pathways were enriched over the Bonferroni p-adjusted value threshold in the complete protein groups, but just three of them were related to bacterial infection. For bacterial proteins, the same protocol for contaminant elimination, quality control, and differential abundance analysis was performed as for human proteins. We did not use g:Profiler for bacterial protein analysis because this platform is not conceived for multi-species analysis. The bacterial protein lists of complete and exclusive proteins from GS and PDAC patients were also included in the retrieve ID/mapping module of the Universal Protein consortium resource. KEGG identifiers were obtained using BlastKoala from the Uniprot FASTA files, and we focused our attention on prokaryote interaction signaling pathways during the analysis in KEGG Mapper Reconstruct Pathway.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zeatin, Metaproteomic, Surfactin, Pancreatic cancer, Proteomic, Il-8, Bile, Carcinogenesis model

### Affiliations
Universidad de Antioquia
Universidad CES
Instituto Colombiano de Medicina Tropical (ICMT), Colombia

### Submitter
Ariel Arteta

### Lab Head
Dr Miryan Sánchez-Jiménez, Nora Cardona-Castro
Instituto Colombiano de Medicina Tropical (ICMT), Colombia


