### Accession
PXD039166

### Title
Proteomic profiling of Extracellular Vesicles in synovial fluid and plasma from Oligoarticular Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis patients reveals novel immunopathogenic biomarkers

### Description
New early low-invasive biomarkers are highly demanded for the management of Oligoarticular Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (OJIA), the most common chronic pediatric rheumatic disease in Western countries and a leading cause of disability. Despite recent significant advances in OJIA treatment, a high percentage of patients undergo arthritis recurrence and/or extension to other joints by one-two years after onset. A deeper understanding of the molecular basis of OJIA pathophysiology is essential for the identification of biomarkers for early disease detection and patient stratification and to guide targeted therapeutic intervention to allow the development of diagnostic and therapeutic interventions earlier in disease course. Proteomic profiling of extracellular vesicles (EVs) released in biological fluids has recently emerged as a minimally invasive approach to elucidate adult arthritis pathogenic mechanisms and for new biomarker discovery. However, EV-prot expression and potential as biomarkers in OJIA have not been explored. This study represents the first detailed longitudinal characterization investigation of EV proteome in newly diagnosed OJIA patients. Fourty-five OJIA patients were recruited at disease onset and followed up for 24 months, and protein expression profiling was carried out by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry in EVs isolated from plasma (PL) and synovial fluid (SF) samples. Because joints are the main targets of clinical manifestations, we first searched for EV-prots potentially implicated in disease development by comparing the EV-proteome of SF (SF_OJIA) vs paired PL (PL_OJIA). We identified a subset of 83 proteins significantly (FDR < 0.01) differentially expressed (31 up- and 52 downregulated) in EVs from SF compared to PL and 33 EV-prots exclusively present in SF samples. Pathway analysis revealed EV-prot enrichment in processes related to cartilage/bone metabolism and inflammation suggesting their role in OJIA joint pathogenesis and potential value as early biomarkers of disease development. Comparative analysis of the SF_OJIA and PL_OJIA EV-proteomic profiles was then carried out respect to the PL of 24 age/gender-matched control children (PL_CTR) to identify early disease-specific proteins. Significant up- and down-regulation of 110 and 92 EV-prots, respectively, were observed in PL_OJIA compared to PL_CTR samples, and 294 EV-prots were found exclusively present, effectively differentiating new-onset OJIA patients from control children. EV-prots were significantly associatd to biological processes related to innate immunity, antigen processing and presentation, and cytoskeleton organization. Importantly, a subset of 76 EV-prots displayed consensual regulation in, and 77 exclusively expressed EV-prots were shared by, PL and SF from patients respect to CTR, potentially representing a disease-associated signature measurable at both the systemic and local levels with diagnostic potential. Finally, we runned WGCNA on the SF- and PL-derived EV-prot datasets to search for EV-prot clusters associated to clinical parameters, such as ANA positivity, disease relapse, polyarticular extension, and iridocyclitis development occurring within the 2 years of follow-up, and we identified 9 and 7 EV-prot modules in SF and PL samples, respectively, able to stratify OJIA patients in distinct subgroups with different disease course. These data provide mechanistic insights into OJIA pathophysiology and an important contribution in the search of new candidate biomarkers for the disease.

### Sample Protocol
EV lysates were processed according to the in-StageTip procedure, as described previously [2364,2365]. 100 ul of EV lysates in RIPA buffer were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM TCEP and 4 mM CAA in thermomixer 10 min at room temperature and at 1000 rpm. Proteins were then isolated by the PAC method [2357]. Briefly, protein aggregation was induced by addition of 70% CAN, and 200 μg of magnetic beads were added to capture aggregated proteins. Magnetic beads were retained by the magnet and the supernatant was removed. Beads were washed one time with 1 ml acetonitrile, followed by one wash with 1 ml 70% ethanol and one wash with 1 ml isopropanol. Washed beads were resuspended in 100 μl TRIS 25 mM pH 8, and captured proteins were digested O.N. at 37°C with 0.7 μg Trypsin and 0.3 μg LysC. Obtained peptides were desalted in Stage-Tips [2361] (normalization to 7 ug peptides) and analyzed  by a nano-UHPLC-MS/MS system using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instrument). Peptide elution was performed with an EASY spray column (75 μm x 25 cm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 400 ml/min using a linear gradient of 7-45% solution B (80% CAN and 20% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) in 65 min. MS analysis was performed in DDA mode. Orbitrap detection was used for MS1 measurements at a resolving power of 120K in a range between 375 and 1500 m/z and with an AGC target of 400000, maximum injection time 50 ms. Advanced Peak Determination was enabled for MS1 measurements. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (rapid scan mode) after higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at a collision energy of 28% and with an AGC target of 10000, maximum injection time 22 ms. 2 sec. cycle time was performed for data dependent MS/MS analysis, during which precursors with a charge range 2-5 were selected for activation in order of abundance. Quadrupole isolation with a 1.6 m/z isolation window was used, and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein raw data were processed with MaxQuant software [2358] version 2.0.3.0. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was set for identifying proteins, peptides, and peptide-spectrum match (PSM). For peptide identification, a minimum length of 7 amino acids was required. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 July 2021). In the processing the Acetyl (Protein N-Term), Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (NQ) were selected as variable modifications and the fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C). Quantification intensities were calculated by the default fast MaxLFQ algorithm with the activated option ‘match between runs’. The resulting protein groups were analyzed using the Perseus software, version 1.6.15.0 [2359]. Contaminants and decoys were filtered out and LFQ values were subsequently log2 transformed for further statistical analysis. Proteins with at least 30% of valid values  in each group were retained for the analysis prior to any relative quantification. Missing values (NA) in retained samples were imputed [1932,2363] from a normal distribution using a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Synovial fluid, Ojia, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto G Gaslini
IRCCS Gaslini

### Submitter
Martina Bartolucci

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS Istituto G Gaslini


