### Accession
PXD023551

### Title
LFQ proteomics of mouse GABAergic interneurons during traumatic brain injury

### Description
Unilateral Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) causes functional disturbances of the neuronal networks spreading even to the undamaged cortical hemisphere. The phenomenon, referred to as transhemispheric diaschisis, is suggested to be mediated by an imbalance of the strength of glutamatergic, excitatory vs. GABAergic, inhibitory neurotransmission.  Here we present evidence that a switch in expression of α Subunits of pore-forming L-Type voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCC), by an expression of CaV1.3 and simultaneous ablation of CaV1.2 in GABAergic interneurons could balance early cortical disturbances manifested as contralateral hyperexcitability in the early phase after TBI. The switch of the VGCC alpha Subunits in GABAergic interneurons was detected using the GAD67-GFP (Glutamate Decarboxylase 67 – Green Fluorescent Protein) Knock-in mouse line. Mice received a TBI with a Controlled Cortical Impact (CCI) to the primary motor and somatosensory cortex at postnatal day 19-21 under anesthesia in vivo. Single GFP+ interneurons located in the undamaged, contralateral cortex were isolated by Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting (FACS) and further analyzed by Mass Spectrometry (MS).  The switch was associated with an increased excitability of Somatostatin (SST) interneurons and extracellular network activity in acute brain slices in Microelectrode Array (MEA) recordings, which could be restored in presence of isradipine (100 nM), which selectively blocks CaV1.3-containing VGCCs. These data suggest that a switch in alpha.subunits of VGCCs expressed on SST-positive interneurons stabilizes early hyperactivity of the contralateral cortical network at 72 h after TBI, thereby promoting an adaptive mechanism to counterbalance post-traumatic hyperexcitabilty that might lead to epileptogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Lysis in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 5 mM DTT and sonication using a Bioruptor device (high intensity, 4°C, 15 min). Proteomic sample prepration according to a modified SP3 protocol (Sielaff et al. 2017), including reduction (DTT), alkylation (IAA), magnetic bead-assisted protein purification, on-bead tryptic digestion and peptide purification. LC-MS analysis according to Distler et al. (2014, 2016; UDMSE) using a Waters NanoAcquity UPLC sysystem coupled to a Synapt G2-S mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and DB search: PLGS v3.0.2 (Waters), UniProt/Swiss-Prot mouse protein sequence DB (download: 2017/07/04)+common contaminants, main parameters: digestion enzyme=trypsin, <=2 missed cleavages/peptide, peptide length>=6 aa, fixed modification=carbamidomethyl cysteine, variable modification=methionine oxidation, FDR=0.01 (by searching reversed sequence db). LFQ (RT alignment, feature clustering, normalization, protein inference): PLGS score>5.5, 0 missed cleavages, peptides/protein>=2, Top3 protein quantification (Silva et al. 2006), FDR=0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Unilateral traumatic brain injury (TBI) causes cortical dysfunctions spreading to the primarily undamaged hemisphere. This phenomenon, called transhemispheric diaschisis, is mediated by an imbalance of glutamatergic versus GABAergic neurotransmission. This study investigated the role of GABAergic, somatostatin-positive (SST) interneurons in the contralateral hemisphere 72&#xa0;h after unilateral TBI. The brain injury was induced to the primary motor/somatosensory cortex of glutamate decarboxylase 67-green fluorescent protein (GAD67-GFP) knock-in mice at postnatal days 19-21 under anesthesia in vivo. Single GFP+ interneurons of the undamaged, contralateral cortex were isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting and analyzed by mass spectrometry. TBI caused a switch of 2 &#x3b1; subunits of pore-forming L-type voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCC) in GABAergic interneurons, an increased expression of CaV1.3, and simultaneous ablation of CaV1.2. This switch was associated with 1) increased excitability of single SST interneurons in patch-clamp recordings and (2) a recovery from early network hyperactivity in the contralateral hemisphere in microelectrode array recordings of acute slices. The electrophysiological changes were sensitive to pharmacological blockade of CaV1.3 (isradipine, 100&#xa0;nM). These data identify a switch of 2 &#x3b1; subunits of VGCCs in SST interneurons early after TBI as a mechanism to counterbalance post-traumatic hyperexcitability.

### Keywords
Neuroplasticity, Traumatic brain injury, L-type voltage-gated calcium channel, Inhibitory interneurons

### Affiliations
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Germany
University Medical Center Mainz

### Submitter
Malte Sielaff

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Germany


