### Accession
PXD000741

### Title
TMT-switch assay for the detection of SNO

### Description
To maximize SNO-proteome coverage and ensure capture of all modified sites, different experimental configurations using both iodo- and cysTMT were evaluated.

### Sample Protocol
TMT-switch assays were carried out on HEK cell lysates treated with five different conditions for parallel labeling; 0.1 mM GSNO to induce SNO, 3 negative control conditions (untreated, 0.1 mM GSH and 0.1 mM GSSG) and unblocked positive control (labeling of all available cysteine residues). Samples were divided (200 ug per group) and labeled with iodoTMT6 or cysTMT6 in a multiplex format (cysTMT0 in the case of one set of positive control). For simultaneous labeling, samples were incubated with equal concentration of cysTMT6 and iodoTMT6. Sequential labeling (untreated and GSNO-treated) were performed in the iodoTMT6 labeling condition then followed by cysTMT6 labeling buffer. Each iodoTMT6 (or cysTMT6) sample were combined, desalted and digested with trypsin. A positive control (all available cysteine residues) sample was processed separately. Digested peptides were incubated with the anti-TMT antibody-affinity resin at room temperature for 2 h.  Eluted samples were then desalted using solid phase extraction. LC/MS/MS analysis was performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS interfaced with a nanoAcquity UPLC system. For peptides from sequential and simultaneous labeling, LC/MS/MS analysis was performed using an Easy-nLC 1000 connected to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was converted to m/zXML format and searched using OMSSA (version 2.1.9) against the concatenated target/decoy human Uniprot database 13 as of July 30, 2012; the searched database contained 173450 entries (including decoys, 86725 excluding them). Search parameters included full digestion with trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages, a parent mass error of 10 ppm and a fragment mass error of 0.03 Da with the variable modifications as NEM, cysTMT6, cysTMT0 or iodoTMT6 for (C) and oxidation (M). Software msConvert (version 2.1.2132) from ProteoWizard was used for peaklist generation. Search results were processed using the trans-proteome pipeline (TPP, version v4.4, rev 1) implementing the PeptideProphet, iProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms. The MS spectra was also searched using the X!Tandem algorithm (version TPP v4.4, rev 1) with the k-score plug-in : TMT as a fixed modification to utilize in order to compare the OMSSA search results. For sequential and simultaneous labeling, updated versions of msConvert (version 3.0.3858) and TPP (version v4.6, rev 1) were used. Peptide and protein identifications were accepted if the peptide confidence was greater than 95.0% as specified by the PeptideProphet algorithm and a protein group probability greater than 95.0% as assigned by the ProteinProphet algorithm. False discovery rates (FDR) were calculated by the ProteinProphet. FDRs were less than 1.0 % using a minimum probability of 0.95 for peptide and protein group as a threshold. Quantitative values for the TMT reporter ions were collected with the Libra module of the TPP using a custom condition file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
S-nitrosation, Tandem mass tag, S-nitrosylation

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
JHMI

### Submitter
Heaseung Chung

### Lab Head
Dr Heaseung Sophia Chung
Johns Hopkins University


