### Accession
PXD038362

### Title
The role of damaged mitochondrial DNA in Parkinson Disease

### Description
Parkinson disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease believed to initiate in the brainstem and then spread throughout the brain. The mechanism by which this occurs is not yet fully understood, but here we show that damaged mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) plays an important role in this process, which can be initiated by dysregulation of the IFNb/IFNAR signalling pathway.   We report that lack of neuronal IFNb/IFNAR, which is associated to the development of PD, causes oxidization, mutation, and deletion in mtDNA. Damaged mtDNA is subsequently extruded extracellularly and can induce PD symptoms like motor and cognitive impairments in healthy mouse brains. It even leads to neurodegeneration in brain regions far from the injection site, suggesting that damaged mtDNA triggers the propagation of PD hallmarks through the brain. We further show that the mechanism by which damaged mtDNA causes pathology in healthy neurons is independent of cGAS and IFNb/IFNAR, but it is mediated by activation of dual Toll-like receptor (TLR)4/9 pathways. Through a proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles containing the damaged mtDNA, we identified the TLR4 activator Ribosomal Protein S3 (Rps3) and established that Rps3 is a key effector protein involved in damaged mtDNA extrusion and recognition.   Collectively, these results reveal a new molecular pathway by which damaged mtDNA can initiate and propagate Parkinson's Disease, paving the way for potential new therapies or disease monitoring.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were purified from media of 3 WT and 3 Ifnb-/- primary cortical neuronal cultures as previously described and final pellet was resuspended in 50 uL of Guanidine buffer containing 6M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethylphosphine), 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide  and 50 mM HEPES. Samples were kept at -80ºC until they were send to our collaborators for LC-MS analysis at DTU Proteomics facility. Peptides were digested with lysyl endopeptidase C and trypsin. Enzyme activity was quenched by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%. The peptide samples were desalted using Sep-Pak column. Peptides were eluted over 140min gradient (4% to 23% in 76min, 23% to 38% in 30min, 38% to 60% in 3min, 60% to 95% in 4min, 95% for 6min, 4% for 21min using 95% buffer B 80% Acn, 0.1% FA) at 250 nl/min from 50cm uPAC column and run on Thermo Fisher Fusion instrument using Top Speed method. Thermo Fisher Fusion  instrument MS1 was set to 120.000 resolution, scanning between 400-1500 m/z range, max IT of 50ms, AGC 4e5; ddMS2 scans were triggered after recognition of ions between 2&7  charge, dynamically excluded for 60sec. MS2 cycle was set to scan all selected ions within 3 sec, isolated at 1.6m/z, using rapid Ion Trap scans, with 35ms injection time, HCD set to 30, AGC target 1e5.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled in the processing and consensus steps, and spectra were matched against the Mus Musculus database obtained from Uniprot. Dynamic modifications were set as Oxidation (M), and Acetyl, Met-loss and Met-loss+Acetyl on protein N-termini. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification. All results were filtered to a 1% FDR, and protein quantitation done using the built-in Minora Feature Detector and Precursor Ions Quantifier.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Brain, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Shohreh Issazadeh-Navikas
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


