### Accession
PXD001550

### Title
Human CRC cell line baseline phosphoproteomics

### Description
There is a need for robust phosphopeptide enrichment methods to allow signaling network analysis in cancer cell lines and tissues with minimal fractionation. With recent instrument developments thousands of unique phosphopeptides can be detected by single-shot LC-MS/MS. However, successful phosphoproteomics experiments still rely on efficient phosphopeptide enrichment from a tryptic digest prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Here we describe a performance assessment of HAMMOC (hydroxyl acid modified metal affinity chromatography) (Sugiyama MCP2007, Kyono, JPR 2008) combined with single shot label-free quantitation at 500 µg peptide input level. We apply the method to profile the baseline phosphorylation landscape of a panel of 8 colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines. These CRC cell lines represent the 3 CRC subtypes (CCS1, CCS2 and CCS3) as reported by large-scale transcriptome analysis. We report an analysis of the phosphoprotein network and processes enriched in the cell lines representing the poor prognosis CCS3 subtype.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture Colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines HT29 and CaCo2 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. CRC cell lines HCT116, RKO, SW480, SW1398, Colo205 and DLD1 were kindly provided by Prof. dr. G.F. Peters, Dept of medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center. Cells were cultured in DMEM medium (Lonza Biowhittaker, Verviers, Belgium) containing 10% Fetal Bovine Serum, 2 mM glutamine, 100 IU/ml sodium penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin, in biological triplicates.   Cell lysis and digestion Cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM Na3VO4 (orthovanadate), 2.5 mM Na4P2O7 (pyrophosphate), and 1 mM Na2C3H7PO6 (ß-glycerophosphate) by scraping and subsequently by sonication. After lysis the protein concentration was determined using the BCA method (ThermoPierce, Rockford, IL). Cell lysate was reduced in 4 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 20 min at 60°C, cooled to room temperature and alkylated in 10 mM iodoactamide for 15 min. in the dark. Subsequently, the cell lysate was diluted to 2M urea using 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.0 and digested overnight with trypsin (10 µg/mg protein) at 37°C. Digestion was stopped in 0.1% TFA and samples were stored at -80°C.  Phosphopeptide enrichment 1 mg tryptic digests were acidified by adding TFA to an end concentration of 0.1% and were desalted on a 100 mg Seppak C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) using a vacuum system. After cartridge activation in ACN (1ml, -0.1 bar) (Biosolve, Valkenswaard, the Netherlands) and equilibration in 0.1% TFA (2ml, -0.2 bar), peptides were bound, washed in 0.1% TFA (2ml) and eluted in 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA (1 ml, -0.2 bar). Desalted peptides were enriched for phosphopeptides using TiO2 beads based using the HAMMOC procedure. Briefly, 500 µg peptides (1 µg/µl) were mixed with 500 µl washing buffer (80% ACN, 0.1% TFA containing 300 mg/ml lactic acid) and applied to 2.5 mg TiO2 beads (GL sciences, 10µm) packed in a 200 µl STAGE tip containing a 16G empore C8 membrane plug (3M, St Paul, MN). The STAGE tip was washed with 200 µl washing buffer followed by 200 µl 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted in two steps in 50 µl 0.5% and 5% piperidine (Fisher scientific) and were quenched in 100 µl 20% H3PO4. All steps were performed by centrifugation (1500 x g, 4 min). Phosphopeptides were desalted using a 200 µl STAGE tip containing a 16G empore SDB-XC membrane plug (3M, St Paul, MN) using the same solvents as used for the Seppak cartridge (20 µl, 1000 x g, 1 min). Desalted phosphopeptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and redissolved in 30 µl 4% ACN, 0.5% TFA; 15 µl was injected on column.    LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3 × 106 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2 × 105 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA file (release February 2013, 70136 entries) using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Label-free phosphopeptide quantification Phosphopeptides were quantified by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For each sample the phosphopeptide intensities were normalized on the median intensity of all identified peptides (from the MaxQuant Evidence table) in the sample (‘normalised intensity’). Fold-change and p values were calculated using a two-tailed Students t-test; phosphopeptides were considered significantly differential at p<0.05. Normalization and statistical testing were performed in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Crc, Colorectal cancer, Label-free, Single-shot

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


