### Accession
PXD025934

### Title
Detecting mistranslation in yeast expressing tRNA variants

### Description
Mistranslation, the mis-incorporation of an amino acid not specified by the “standard” genetic code, occurs in all cells. tRNA variants that increase mistranslation arise spontaneously and engineered tRNAs can achieve mistranslation frequencies approaching 10% in yeast and bacteria. The goal of this study was to detect mistranslation from two different tRNA variants. The first variant, tRNA-Pro-G3:U70, has a mutation in its acceptor stem creating a G3:U70 base pair which is the key identity element for the alanine tRNA synthetase. This tRNA should be charged with alanine and mis-incorporate alanine at proline codons. The second variant, tRNA-Ser-UCU,G26A, is a serine tRNA with an arginine anticodon and a G26A secondary mutation to dampen function and prevent lethal levels of mistranslation. This tRNA should mis-incorporate serine at arginine codons.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in a denaturing lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, 75 mM NaCl) and lysed by bead-beating. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 55°, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature, and the alkylation was quenched with additional 5 mM dithiothreitol for 15 min at room temperature. Robotic purification and digestion of proteins into peptides were performed on the KingFisherTM Flex using LysC and the R2-P1 method as described in Leutert et al. (2019). Peptides were analyzed on a hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Exploris 480; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were resuspended in 4% acetonitrile, 3% formic acid and loaded onto a 100 μm ID × 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 3 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH), and separated by reverse‐phase chromatography on a 100 μm ID × 30 cm analytical column packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) housed into a column heater set at 50°. Peptides were separated using a gradient of 5-30% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at 400 nL/min over 95 minutes, with a total 120 minute acquisition time. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a defined cycle time of 3 seconds. For each cycle one full mass spectrometry scan was acquired from 350 to 1200 m/z at 120,000 resolution with a fill target of 3E6 ions and automated calculation of injection time. The most abundant ions from the full MS scan were selected for fragmentation using 2 m/z precursor isolation window and beam‐type collisional‐activation dissociation (HCD) with 30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 15,000 resolution by setting the AGC target to standard and injection time to automated mode. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from selection for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the S. cerevisiae protein sequence database (downloaded from the Saccharomyces Genome Database resource in 2014) using Comet (release 2015.01; Eng et al. 2013). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm. Constant modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.0215 Da) and variable modification of methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da) were used for all searches. Variable modification of proline to alanine (-26.0157 Da) or arginine to serine (-69.0691 Da) were used for the respective mistranslating tRNAs. A maximum of two for each variable modifications were allowed per peptide. Search results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide spectrum match level using Percolator (Käll et al. 2007).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mistranslation, Yeast, Lc-msms, Trna variants

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Science, University of Washington, USA
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington

### Submitter
Matthew Berg

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Judit Villen
Department of Genome Science, University of Washington, USA


