### Accession
PXD016929

### Title
Concurrent EPA and DHA Supplementation Impairs Brown Adipogenesis of C2C12 Cells

### Description
To confirm changing C2C12 cells genetic profile and losing their myogenic ability, we investigated the combined effect of EPA and DHA on the relative expression of genes regulating the terminal differentiation of myoblast into mature multinucleated myotubes.

### Sample Protocol
C2C12s were cultured and differentiated in 6-well plates. Cells were gently scraped from the wells using PBS (1 ml/well). Lysis buffer (T-PER) supplemented with protease and phosphatase cocktail inhibitors at a ratio of 1:100 was used to extract total cellular protein.

### Data Protocol
Bruker data analysis 4.0 software was used to pick peaks from the LC-MS/MS chromatogram using a default setting as recommended by the manufacturer to create ProteinAnalysisResults.xml file which was then used for MASCOT database search. The parent ion- and fragment ion mass tolerances were set at 0.6 Da with cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation as fixed and variable modifications in MASCOT search. Mascot search was carried out against mouse proteins in UniProt database to identify the proteins in the cell extracts. The peptides from all proteins were identified with 95% confidence and reported based on <5% false discovery rate using at least 2 peptides with one unique peptide from a protein. MASCOT.dat files were then exported into Scaffold proteome software version 4.8 (http://www.proteomesoftware.com) to identify differentially expressed proteins [40]. The quantitative differences were calculated on the basis of 95% confidence limit.

### Publication Abstract
Maternal dietary supplementation of <i>n</i>-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (<i>n</i>-3 PUFAs), especially eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), is considered to play positive roles in fetal neuro system development. However, maternal <i>n</i>-3 PUFAs may induce molecular reprogramming of uncommitted fetal myoblasts into adipocyte phenotype, in turn affecting lipid metabolism and energy expenditure of the offspring. The objective of this <i>in vitro</i> study was to investigate the combined effects of EPA and DHA on C2C12 cells undergoing brown adipogenic differentiation. C2C12 myoblasts were cultured to confluency and then treated with brown adipogenic differentiation medium with and without 50 &#x3bc;M EPA and 50 &#x3bc;M DHA. After differentiation, mRNA and protein samples were collected. Gene expression and protein levels were analyzed by real-time PCR and western blot. General Proteomics analysis was conducted using mass spectrometric evaluation. The effect of EPA and DHA on cellular oxygen consumption was measured using a Seahorse XFP Analyzer. Cells treated with <i>n</i>-3 PUFAs had significantly less (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05) expression of the brown adipocyte marker genes PGC1&#x3b1;, DIO2, and UCP3. Expression of mitochondrial biogenesis-related genes TFAM, PGC1&#x3b1;, and PGC1&#x3b2; were significantly downregulated (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05) by <i>n</i>-3 PUFAs treatment. Expression of mitochondrial electron transportation chain (ETC)-regulated genes were significantly inhibited (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05) by <i>n</i>-3 PUFAs, including ATP5J2, COX7a1, and COX8b. Mass spectrometric and western blot evaluation showed protein levels of enzymes which regulate the ETC and Krebs cycle, including ATP synthase &#x3b1; and &#x3b2; (F1F0 complex), citrate synthase, succinate CO-A ligase, succinate dehydrogenase (complex II), ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase complex subunits (complex III), aconitate hydratase, cytochrome c, and pyruvate carboxylase were all decreased in the <i>n</i>-3 PUFAs group (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05). Genomic and proteomic changes were accompanied by mitochondrial dysfunction, represented by significantly reduced oxygen consumption rate, ATP production, and proton leak (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05). This study suggested that EPA and DHA may alter the BAT fate of myoblasts by inhibiting mitochondrial biogenesis and activity and induce white-like adipogenesis, shifting the metabolism from lipid oxidation to synthesis.

### Keywords
Brown adipogenesis, Mitochondrial function, Metabolism, C2c12 cells, N-3 pufas

### Affiliations
University of Arkansas
1Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701

### Submitter
Rohana Liyanage

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Huang
1Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701


