### Accession
PXD037472

### Title
GPCR signaling neighborhoods associate with the susceptibility to adverse drug reactions of incretin mimetics

### Description
G protein-coupled receptors are important drug targets that engage and activate signaling transducers in multiple cellular compartments. Delineating therapeutic signaling from signaling associated with adverse events is an important step towards rational drug design. The glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP-1R) is a validated target for the treatment of diabetes and obesity, but drugs that target this receptor are a frequent cause of adverse events. Using recently developed biosensors, we explored the ability of GLP-1R to activate 15 pathways in 4 cellular compartments and demonstrate that modifications aimed at improving the therapeutic potential of GLP-1R agonists greatly influence compound efficacy, potency and safety in a pathway- and compartment-selective manner. These findings, together with comparative structure analysis, time-lapse microscopy and phosphoproteomics, reveal unique signaling signatures for GLP-1R agonists at the level of receptor conformation, functional selectivity and location bias, thus associating signaling neighborhoods with functionally distinct cellular outcomes and clinical consequences.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells (350,000 cells/mL) were transfected in suspension using 3 µg of linear PEI (MW 25,000) per 1 µg of plasmid DNA and seeded onto poly-D-lysine-coated 60 mm dishes at a density of 1,750,000 cells per dish. After a 24-h incubation, cells were washed twice with PBS and placed in starvation media (DMEM with penicillin/streptomycin). After a 48-h incubation, cells were washed twice with HBSS and maintained in the same buffer. Cells were stimulated for 0, 5, 15, 30 and 60 min with vehicle (1% DMSO), semaglutide or danuglipron (1 µM). Cell extracts were prepared in 200 µL of the lysis buffer and denatured at 95°C for 10 min placed on ice and sonicated using a probe sonicator (3 s on, 3 s off pulse, 1 min, 30% amplitude) (Branson). Lysate protein concentration was determined using the Pierce bicinchoninic assay kit (ThermoFischer Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The lysates were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at room temperature and alkylated using 15 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were precipitated and digested on beads using MagReSyn® Amine magnetic beads (ReSyn Biosciences) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein digestion was conducted overnight at 37°C with lysyl endopeptidase (LysC, Wako) (1:150 LysC/protein, w/w) and trypsin (1:300 trypsin/protein, w/w). 20% TFA, 2 M glycolic acid in 80% ACN were added to the samples at a 1:1 ratio for phosphopeptide enrichment using MagReSyn® TiO2 magnetic beads (ReSyn Biosciences) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The enriched phosphopeptides were dried overnight in a SpeedVac, resuspended into 5% formic acid (FA), desalted using StageTip (ThermoFischer Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions and dried in a SpeedVac. The experiment was performed in biological triplicates. Samples were resuspended into 2% ACN and 0.1% FA (solvent A) and injected into an UltiMate 3000 UPLC autosampler (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 100 µm × 2 cm) and separated on a 50 cm long C18 Easy spray column (ThermoFisher Scientific). Chromatographic separation of the peptides was archived by the following 80 min gradient: 4-24 % of solvent B (98% ACN and 0.1% FA) in 60 min, to 30 % in 5 min, to 95 % in 2 min where it was kept for 4 min, before going to 4 % in 2 min and hold for 7 min. During the entire gradient, the mass spectrometer was operating in positive polarity using a data-independent acquisition mode. All mass spectra were acquired in profile mode using the Orbitrap mass analyzer. An acquisition cycle consisted of one survey mass spectrum acquired at a 120,000 mass resolution from m/z 350 to 1450, with an AGC target of 1,000,000 and a maximal injection time of 50 ms. This was followed by 40 DIA cycles with a dynamic isolation window. The individual spectra were recorded at a 30,000 resolution with 27 % NCE, an AGC target was set to 1000%, and a maximal injection time of 54 ms.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were converted to mzML format by MSConvert (version 3.0.21258) (Chambers et al., 2012) applying peak picking of the mass spectra with the vendor-provided algorithm (ThermoFisher Scientific). The mzML files were analyzed using the FragPipe GUI v18 for both library and DIA search. First, MSFragger (Kong et al., 2017) was used to search files against the human Swissprot database (20`409 entries). Trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages was set as digestion enzyme, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N-terminus and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine (maximal occurrence was set to three) were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Peptide length was restricted to 7 to 50 amino acids, and 500 to 5000 Da. The precursor tolerance was set to ±20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm and MSBooster was enabled. The resulting peptide-spectrum matches were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate with Percolator (Kall et al., 2007) as part of the Philosopher toolkit (v4.4) (da Veiga Leprevost et al., 2020) and converted to a spectra library. DIA files were analyzed by DIA-NN 1.8.1 (Demichev et al., 2020; Steger et al., 2021) using the previously generated library and the monitor-command mode.

### Publication Abstract
G protein-coupled receptors are important drug targets that engage and activate signaling transducers in multiple cellular compartments. Delineating therapeutic signaling from signaling associated with adverse events is an important step towards rational drug design. The glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP-1R) is a validated target for the treatment of diabetes and obesity, but drugs that target this receptor are a frequent cause of adverse events. Using recently developed biosensors, we explored the ability of GLP-1R to activate 15 pathways in 4 cellular compartments and demonstrate that modifications aimed at improving the therapeutic potential of GLP-1R agonists greatly influence compound efficacy, potency, and safety in a pathway- and compartment-selective manner. These findings, together with comparative structure analysis, time-lapse microscopy, and phosphoproteomics, reveal unique signaling signatures for GLP-1R agonists at the level of receptor conformation, functional selectivity, and location bias, thus associating signaling neighborhoods with functionally distinct cellular outcomes and clinical consequences.

### Keywords
Bret, Compartmentalized signaling, Functional selectivity, Gpcr, Incretin mimetics, Adverse drug reactions, Glp-1r

### Affiliations
Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University. 
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen.
Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Dr Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Pierre Sabatier

### Lab Head
Dr Volker M. Lauschke
Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Dr Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany


