### Accession
PXD036626

### Title
TAP and nano LC-MS/MS of Arabidopsis thaliana ABCE2 protein

### Description
ATP-Binding Cassette E (ABCE) proteins dissociate cytoplasmic ribosomes after translation terminates, and contribute to ribosome recycling, thus linking translation termination to initiation. This function has been demonstrated to be essential in animals, fungi, and archaea, but remains unexplored in plants. In most species, ABCE is encoded by a single-copy gene; by contrast, Arabidopsis thaliana has two ABCE paralogs, of which ABCE2 seems to conserve the ancestral function. We isolated apiculata7-1 (api7-1), the first viable, hypomorphic allele of ABCE2, which has a pleiotropic morphological phenotype reminiscent of mutations affecting ribosome biogenesis factors and ribosomal proteins. We also studied api7-2, a null, recessive lethal allele of ABCE2. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed that ABCE2 physically interacts with components of the translation machinery. An RNA-seq study of the api7-1 mutant showed increased responses to iron and sulfur starvation. We also found increased transcript levels of genes related to auxin signaling and metabolism. Our results support for the first time a conserved role for ABCE proteins in translation in plants, as previously shown for the animal, fungal, and archaeal lineages. In Arabidopsis, the ABCE2 protein seems important for general growth and vascular development, likely due to an indirect effect through auxin metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
TAP assay of the GSRhino-TAP-tagged ABCE2 fusion from Arabidopsis cell suspension cultures was performed as previously described (Van Leene et al., 2015; García-León et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by nano LC-MS/MS at the CNB. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Araport11 using the MASCOT search engine. Proteins identified with at least 1 unique peptide with a MASCOT score higher than 25 (P < 0.05) were considered to be valid.

### Publication Abstract
ATP-Binding Cassette E (ABCE) proteins dissociate cytoplasmic ribosomes after translation terminates, and contribute to ribosome recycling, thus linking translation termination to initiation. This function has been demonstrated to be essential in animals, fungi, and archaea, but remains unexplored in plants. In most species, ABCE is encoded by a single-copy gene; by contrast, <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> has two <i>ABCE</i> paralogs, of which <i>ABCE2</i> seems to conserve the ancestral function. We isolated <i>apiculata7-1</i> (<i>api7-1</i>), the first viable, hypomorphic allele of <i>ABCE2</i>, which has a pleiotropic morphological phenotype reminiscent of mutations affecting ribosome biogenesis factors and ribosomal proteins. We also studied <i>api7-2</i>, a null, recessive lethal allele of <i>ABCE2</i>. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed that ABCE2 physically interacts with components of the translation machinery. An RNA-seq study of the <i>api7-1</i> mutant showed increased responses to iron and sulfur starvation. We also found increased transcript levels of genes related to auxin signaling and metabolism. Our results support for the first time a conserved role for ABCE proteins in translation in plants, as previously shown for the animal, fungal, and archaeal lineages. In Arabidopsis, the ABCE2 protein seems important for general growth and vascular development, likely due to an indirect effect through auxin metabolism.

### Keywords
Tap; lc-ms/ms; arabidopsis; abce2; translation

### Affiliations
Instituto de Bioingeniería, Universidad Miguel Hernández, 03202 Elche, SPAIN
Universidad Miguel Hernández

### Submitter
Carla Navarro-Quiles

### Lab Head
Dr José Luis Micol
Instituto de Bioingeniería, Universidad Miguel Hernández, 03202 Elche, SPAIN


