### Accession
PXD035618

### Title
Insights into the digestive gland of Mytilus coruscus under heat stress using TMT-based proteomics

### Description
A healthy existence relationship between mussels and environment relies on suitable PH, adequate oxygen and suitable temperature. Besides ocean acidification, ocean warming has been shown to cause mussel dead, a phenomenon responsible for extensive mussel dead around the word. How heat stress impacts mussel alive is poorly understood. We founded that. The superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity of two treatment groups were significantly higher than that of control group, and the activity of acid phosphatase (ACP) was significantly higher in two treatment groups than control group. The lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity of 26 ℃ treatment group was significantly higher than that of control group, and the LDH activity of 33 ℃ treatment group was significantly lower than that of control group. Cellular content of lysozyme (LZM) was significantly higher in two treatment groups than control group. In this study, we applied TMT quantification to investigate how Mytilus coruscus responds to heat stress (26 ℃, 33 ℃). We identified 1652 to 1878 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) from these heat conditions, among which 897 were commonly regulated by all the two temperature and were significantly enriched in nutrients digestion and absorption (e. g. fat digestion and absorption). Furthermore, proteins associated with nutrients metabolism, signaling pathways (p53 signaling pathway and MAPK signaling pathway)and energy metabolism (e. g. TCA cycle) were impacted, suggesting that the ability of basic metabolism of Mytilus coruscus may be altered by heat stress.

### Sample Protocol
Mytilus coruscus was obtained from an aquatic product market in Zhoushan City, Zhejiang Province, China. M. coruscus were transferred into aerated water tank and adapted to natural circumstances for 7 days (PH: 7.5~8.0, salinity: 30 ‰, temperature: 18 ℃). In this study, three temperature groups were set up (18 ℃, 26 ℃ and 33 ℃), of which 18 ℃ group was the control group, temperature 26℃ and 33 ℃ were the high temperature treatment groups. After 24 h treatment at different temperatures, the digestive glands of M. coruscus in different temperature groups were collected in triplicate. Immediately extract the protein from the collected digestive glands.

### Data Protocol
Twenty mg digestive gland samples were transferred into a 2 mL centrifuge tube with two steel beads, and 1 XCocktail with appropriate amount of SDS L3 and EDTA was added to each sample.Centrifuge for 15 minutes at 25,000 g*4 °C to take the supernatant, and the supernatant is the protein solution.The Shimadzu LC-20AB liquid phase system was used, and the separation column was a 5 um 4.6 x 250 mm Gemini C18 column for liquid phase separation of the sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mytlius coruscus, Tmt, Heat stress

### Affiliations
Zhejiang Ocean University
19883838836

### Submitter
乐钟 许

### Lab Head
Dr Insights into the digestive gland of Mytilus coruscus under heat stress using TMT-based proteomics
Zhejiang Ocean University


