### Accession
PXD038842

### Title
Calpain activity is regulated by a KCTD7–cullin 3 complex via non-degradative ubiquitination

### Description
Calpains are a class of non-lysosomal cysteine proteases that exert their regulatory functions via limited proteolysis of their substrates. Similar to the lysosomal and proteasomal systems, calpain dysregulation is implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disease and cancer. Despite intensive efforts placed on the identification of mechanisms that regulate calpains, however, global regulators of calpains activity have remained elusive. Here we show that calpains are regulated by KCTD7, a cytosolic protein of previously uncharacterized function whose pathogenic mutations result in epilepsy, progressive ataxia, and severe neurocognitive deterioration. We show that KCTD7 works in complex with Cullin-3 and Rbx1 to execute atypical, non-degradative ubiquitination of calpains at specific sites (K398 of calpain 1, and K280 and K674 of calpain 2). Experiments based on single-lysine mutants of ubiquitin determined that KCTD7 mediates ubiquitination of calpain 1 via K6-, K27-, K29-, and K63-linked chains, whereas it uses K6- mediated ubiquitination to modify calpain 2. Loss of KCTD7-mediated ubiquitination of calpains led to calpain hyperactivation, aberrant cleavage of downstream targets, and caspase-3 activation. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of Kctd7 in mice phenotypically recapitulated human KCTD7 deficiency and resulted in calpain hyperactivation, behavioral impairments, and neurodegeneration. These phenotypes were largely prevented by pharmacological inhibition of calpains, thus demonstrating a major role of calpain dysregulation in KCTD7-associated disease. Finally, we determined that Cullin-3–KCTD7 mediates ubiquitination of all ubiquitous calpains. These results unveil a global mechanism and potential target to restrain calpain activity in human disease and shed light on the molecular pathogenesis of KCTD7-associated disease.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin was added to immunoprecipitated proteins on the beads for 6 hours at 37°C. The initial digested samples were centrifuged for 2 minutes at 5,000 x g and the supernatants were collected into fresh tubes. Beads were washed twice with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the supernatants were pooled. The resulting samples were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 1 hour, and cysteine was alkylated with 80 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes in dark. Samples were treated with 600 ng of trypsin to overnight incubation at 37°C. The resulting peptides were desalted using solid-phase extraction on a C18 Spin column and eluted with 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoElute coupled to a timsTOF Pro2 Mass Spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). Samples were loaded on a capillary C18 column (15 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 1.9 μm particle size, 120 Å pore size; Bruker Daltonics). The flow rate was kept at 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water, and Solvent B was 0.1% FA in ACN. The peptides were separated on a 100 min analytical gradient from 2% ACN/0.1% FA to 35% ACN/0.1% FA for a total of 120 min gradient. The timsTOF Pro2 was operated in the PASEF mode. MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired from 100-1700 m/z. The inverse reduced ion mobility 1/K0 was set to 0.60−1.60 V·s/cm2 over a ramp time of 100 ms. Data-dependent acquisition was performed using 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle with a near 100% duty cycle.

### Data Protocol
The resulting protein tandem MS data was queried for protein identification against the SwissProt human database (released on April, 2021) using MaxQuant v2.1.0.0. The following modifications were set as search parameters: peptide mass tolerance at 20 ppm, trypsin digestion cleavage after K or R (except when followed by P), 2 allowed missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylated cysteine (static modification), and oxidized methionine, deaminated asparagine/glutamine, protein N-term acetylation, and Diglycyl lysine (variable modification). Search results were validated with peptide and protein FDR both at 0.01. High confident ubiquitination sites were verified with high localization probability (>0.95) and manual confirmation of MS/MS spectrum.

### Publication Abstract
Calpains are a class of non-lysosomal cysteine proteases that exert their regulatory functions via limited proteolysis of their substrates. Similar to the lysosomal and proteasomal systems, calpain dysregulation is implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disease and cancer. Despite intensive efforts placed on the identification of mechanisms that regulate calpains, however, calpain protein modifications that regulate calpain activity are incompletely understood. Here we show that calpains are regulated by KCTD7, a cytosolic protein of previously uncharacterized function whose pathogenic mutations result in epilepsy, progressive ataxia, and severe neurocognitive deterioration. We show that KCTD7 works in complex with Cullin-3 and Rbx1 to execute atypical, non-degradative ubiquitination of calpains at specific sites (K398 of calpain 1, and K280 and K674 of calpain 2). Experiments based on single-lysine mutants of ubiquitin determined that KCTD7 mediates ubiquitination of calpain 1 via K6-, K27-, K29-, and K63-linked chains, whereas it uses K6-mediated ubiquitination to modify calpain 2. Loss of KCTD7-mediated ubiquitination of calpains led to calpain hyperactivation, aberrant cleavage of downstream targets, and caspase-3 activation. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of Kctd7 in mice phenotypically recapitulated human KCTD7 deficiency and resulted in calpain hyperactivation, behavioral impairments, and neurodegeneration. These phenotypes were largely prevented by pharmacological inhibition of calpains, thus demonstrating a major role of calpain dysregulation in KCTD7-associated disease. Finally, we determined that Cullin-3-KCTD7 mediates ubiquitination of all ubiquitous calpains. These results unveil a novel mechanism and potential target to restrain calpain activity in human disease and shed light on the molecular pathogenesis of KCTD7-associated disease.

### Keywords
Human, Pasef, Calpain

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Technology Access Center at the McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Byoung-Kyu Cho

### Lab Head
Dr Young Ah Goo
Mass Spectrometry Technology Access Center at the McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA


