### Accession
PXD011164

### Title
Nemo-like kinase drives Foxp3 stability and is critical for maintenance of immune tolerance by regulatory T cells

### Description
The Foxp3 transcription factor is a crucial determinant of both regulatory T (TREG) cell development and their functional maintenance. Appropriate modulation of tolerogenic immune responses therefore requires tight regulation of Foxp3 transcriptional output, and this involves both transcriptional and post-translational regulation. Here, we show that during T cell activation, phosphorylation of Foxp3 in TREG cells can be regulated by a TGFβ Activated Kinase 1 (TAK1)-Nemo Like Kinase (NLK) signaling pathway. NLK interacts with Foxp3 in TREG cells and directly phosphorylates Foxp3 on multiple serine residues. This phosphorylation results in stabilization of Foxp3 protein levels by preventing association with the STUB1 E3-ubiquitin protein ligase, resulting in both reduced ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated degradation. Conditional TREG cell NLK-knockout (NLKTREG) results in decreased TREG cell-mediated immunosuppression in vivo and NLK-deficient TREG cell animals develop more severe experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Our data suggest a molecular mechanism, in which stimulation of TCR-mediated signaling can induce a TAK1-NLK pathway to sustain Foxp3 transcriptional activity through stabilization of protein levels, thereby maintaining TREG cell suppressive function. Pharmacological manipulation of this phosphorylation-ubiquitination axis may provide therapeutic opportunities for regulating TREG cell function, for example during cancer immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
For Co-immunoprecipitation, HEK293 cells were transfected with PEI in 60 mm tissue culture dishes, and 48 hours post transfection cells were lysed in NP-40 lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.5% Nonidet p40 (US Biologicals, Salem, MA, USA), 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, supplemented with 1% HALT protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)). Cell lysates were cleared by high speed centrifugation. Immunoprecipitation was performed utilizing anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel or anti-HA conjugated beads (Sigma-Aldrich). Precipitates were washed 3 times in lysis buffer. After immuno-precipitation of FoxP3, proteins were on‐bead digested in 2M Urea, 50 mM Ammonium BiCarbonate (ABC) and finally desalted with homemade C-18 stagetips (3M, St Paul, MN). Peptides were separated on-a 30 cm column (75-μm ID fused silica capillary with emitter tip, New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with 3-μm aquapur gold C-18 material (Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a 3-hour gradient (0-80% Acetonitrile), and delivered by an easy nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (nHPLC) (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were electrosprayed directly into a LTQ-Verlos-Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed in data-dependent mode with the resolution of the full scan set at 30,000, after which the top 10 peaks were selected for Higher energy Collision-induced Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (set at a normalized energy of 40%) and detection in the Orbitrap with a target setting of 5000 ions at a resolution of 7500.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with Maxquant software, version 1.6.1.0. For identification, the mouse Uniprot database was searched with oxidation of methionine and STY phosphorylation set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification, while peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The Foxp3 transcription factor is a crucial determinant of both regulatory T (T<sub>REG</sub>) cell development and their functional maintenance. Appropriate modulation of tolerogenic immune responses therefore requires the tight regulation of Foxp3 transcriptional output, and this involves both transcriptional and post-translational regulation. Here, we show that during T&#xa0;cell activation, phosphorylation of Foxp3 in T<sub>REG</sub> cells can be regulated by a TGF-&#x3b2; activated kinase 1 (TAK1)-Nemo-like kinase (NLK) signaling pathway. NLK interacts and phosphorylates Foxp3 in T<sub>REG</sub> cells, resulting in the stabilization of protein levels by preventing association with the STUB1 E3-ubiquitin protein ligase. Conditional T<sub>REG</sub> cell NLK-knockout (NLK<sup>&#x394;TREG</sup>) results in decreased T<sub>REG</sub> cell-mediated immunosuppression in&#xa0;vivo, and NLK-deficient T<sub>REG</sub> cell animals develop more severe experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Our data suggest a molecular mechanism, in which stimulation of TCR-mediated signaling can induce a TAK1-NLK pathway to sustain Foxp3 transcriptional activity through the stabilization of protein levels, thereby maintaining T<sub>REG</sub> cell suppressive function.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Phosphorylation, Tcr, Immune tolerance, Regulatory t cell, Nlk, Foxp3

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Medicine & Division of Pediatrics, Regenerative Medicine Center, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J. Coffer
Center for Molecular Medicine & Division of Pediatrics, Regenerative Medicine Center, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands


