### Accession
PXD029425

### Title
Characterization of GFP-Gdown1 interactors by IP and LC-MS/MS

### Description
Approximately half of purified mammalian RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is associated with a tightly interacting sub-stoichiometric subunit, Gdown1. Previous studies have established that Gdown1 inhibits transcription initiation through competitive interactions with general transcription factors and blocks the Pol II termination activity of transcription termination factor 2 (TTF2). However, the biological functions of Gdown1 remain poorly understood. Here, we utilized genetic, microscopic, and multi-omics approaches to functionally characterize Gdown1 in three human cell lines. Acute depletion of Gdown1 caused minimal direct effects on transcription. We show that Gdown1 resides predominantly in the cytoplasm of interphase cells, shuttles between the cytoplasm and nucleus, and is regulated by nuclear export. Gdown1 enters the nucleus at the onset of mitosis. Consistently, genetic ablation of Gdown1 is associated with partial de-repression of mitotic transcription, and Gdown1 KO cells present with evidence of aberrant mitoses coupled to p53 pathway activation. Evidence is presented demonstrating that Gdown1 modulates the combined functions of purified productive elongation factors PAF1C, RTF1, SPT6, DSIF, and P-TEFb in vitro. Collectively, our findings support a model wherein the Pol II-regulatory function of Gdown1 occurs during mitosis and is required for stably maintaining a pattern of gene expression across cell divisions.   To characterize potential interactors of Gdown1 in the cytoplasm, an eGFP-TEV-Gdown1 HAP1 cell line was developed. Cytosolic extracts were prepared, GFP-Trap Agarose (Chromotek) was utilized to pull down Gdown1 and associated factors, and associated proteins were characterized by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
For IP of GFP-Gdown1 complexes from cells, HAP1 GFP-Gdown1 cells were lysed in a buffer containing 20 mM Tris pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% v/v Igepal CA-360, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% isopropanol-saturated PMSF, and supplemented with a cOmplete mini protease inhibitor cocktail tablet. The lysate was clarified of cell debris and chromatin by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. A portion of the supernatant was saved as input. GFP-Trap agarose (Chromotek gta-10) was equilibrated in the lysis buffer, and approximately 12.5 uL beads were combined with the clarified cell lysate and rotated at 4°C for 1 hour. The beads were pelleted and washed in 500 µL lysis buffer three times, and bound proteins were dissociated by incubation in 2X protein sample buffer for 5 minutes at 95°C. For mass spectrometry, IP of GFP-Gdown1 was carried out as described above, and the beads were washed and resuspended in 50 µL of a buffer containing 20 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, and 1 mM DTT. Complexes were eluted from the beads via digestion with 50 ng TEV (University of Iowa Protein and Crystallography Facility, TEV-00-001), and the supernatant was submitted to the University of Iowa Proteomics Facility for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analyzed using Byonic with the following paramaters:  #PMi-Byonic parameters v1.4.0 # #Thu Oct 29 18:46:23 CDT 2020 combyne_sqlite_enable=1 skip_bad_spectra=1 n_glycan_checkbox=0 lock_mass_list=None DatabaseFiles=E\:\\DataBases_DirectDnLd\\Human\\HumanUni9606_201008.fasta\\HumanUni9606_201008.fasta Custom_xlink=0 common_max=1 results_suffix=[spec]_[date]_Byonic fragment_mass_error=10.0 schema_version=2 DSS_xlink=0 DebugMode=0 random_sample_size=400 export_mzIdentML_checkbox=0 min_chunk_size=500 combyne_auto_score=1 precursor_mass_max=10000 max_chunk_size=2000 output_results=1 off_by_one=3 machine_type=0 max_precursors=1 rare_max=1 score_version=2 DebugText= add_decoys=1 precursor_mass_error=6.0 nglycan_quick_reject_labile_scale=0.01 Wildcard=0 maximum_missed_cleavages=2 xlink_decoys_checkbox=0 deisotoped_spectra_checkbox=0 chunking_method=0 DigestLetters=RK PARAMETER_VERSION=1.4.0 output_top_scores=0 combyne_min_score=0 precursor_unit=0 mod_text=Carbamidomethyl / +57.021464 @ C | fixed\r\nAcetyl / +42.010565 @ Protein N-term | rare1\r\n% Custom modification text below\n combyne_fdr= Trisulfide_text=Trisulfide / 29.956421 @ C | xlink enable_promote_score_nglycan=0 apply_charges_index=1 precursor_ppm_hardcut=0 byonic_sqlite_enable=1 add_contaminants=0 DSS_xlink_text=DSS / 138.0680796 @ K | xlink\nXlink\:DSS / 156.078644 @ K | common2 % Dead end centroid_prefer_type=2 recal_option=0 combyne_extra_params= protein_fdr_pulldown=0 centroid_width_type=0 quick_reject_wildcard=99 disulfide_protein_groups=1 precursor_assignments=1 xlink_details= wildcard_delta=0 DigestCutterType=0 centroid_width_val=0.01 Disulfide=0 quick_reject=95 Custom_xlink_text= wildcard_max_mass=100 o_glycan_checkbox=0 fragment_ppm_hardcut=0 features_text= Disulfide_text=Disulfide / -2.015650 @ C | xlink fragment_unit2=0 Trisulfide=0 wildcard_min_mass=-40 xlink_decoys_mass_offset=11 centroid_topk=1000 focused_database_checkbox=0 DigestType=2 fragment_mass_error2=20 fragment_unit=0 output_report=0

### Publication Abstract
Approximately half of purified mammalian RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is associated with a tightly interacting sub-stoichiometric subunit, Gdown1. Previous studies have established that Gdown1 inhibits transcription initiation through competitive interactions with general transcription factors and blocks the Pol II termination activity of transcription termination factor 2 (TTF2). However, the biological functions of Gdown1 remain poorly understood. Here, we utilized genetic, microscopic, and multi-omics approaches to functionally characterize Gdown1 in three human cell lines. Acute depletion of Gdown1 caused minimal direct effects on transcription. We show that Gdown1 resides predominantly in the cytoplasm of interphase cells, shuttles between the cytoplasm and nucleus, and is regulated by nuclear export. Gdown1 enters the nucleus at the onset of mitosis. Consistently, genetic ablation of Gdown1 is associated with partial de-repression of mitotic transcription, and Gdown1 KO cells present with evidence of aberrant mitoses coupled to p53 pathway activation. Evidence is presented demonstrating that Gdown1 modulates the combined functions of purified productive elongation factors PAF1C, RTF1, SPT6, DSIF&#xa0;and P-TEFb in vitro. Collectively, our findings support a model wherein the Pol II-regulatory function of Gdown1 occurs during mitosis and is required for genome integrity.

### Keywords
Gfp, Human, Gdown1, Ip

### Affiliations
Professor, University of Iowa Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
University of Iowa Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Christopher Ball

### Lab Head
Dr David Price
Professor, University of Iowa Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology


