### Accession
PXD035894

### Title
Multi-omics analysis of application on regulation of phosphorus transport in soybean root

### Description
The regulatory effects of uneven phosphorus supplies on phosphorus transport in soybean roots is still unclear. To further analyze the regulatory effects of low-phosphorus stress on phosphorus transport in soybean roots and the effects of uneven phosphorus application on the physiological mechanism of phosphorus transport in soybean roots, dual-root soybean plants were prepared via grafting, and a sand culture experiment was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and protein digestion: According to the manufacturer ' s instructions ( Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA ), TMT reagent was used to label 1×10^(-4) g peptide mixture for each sample. The labeled peptides were fractionated by a High-pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) by gradually increasing the gradient elution with acetonitrile.Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectroscopy (LC–MS/MS) analysis was performed on a Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC instrument (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60/90 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Protein extraction: One gram of sample tissue was added to liquid nitrogen for grinding, and the proteins were extracted by using SDT (4% w SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.6), 0.1 M dithiothreitol [DTT]) buffer, and then the protein was quantified by a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). The proteins from each sample were digested by trypsinization via a filter-assisted proteome preparation kit. The peptide was desalted through C18 cartridges and redissolved in 40 μL of 0.1% formic acid solution after lyophilization. Finally, the peptides were quantified by determining the optical density at 280 nm (OD280). Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and protein digestion: According to the manufacturer ' s instructions ( Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA ), TMT reagent was used to label 1×10^(-4) g peptide mixture for each sample. The labeled peptides were fractionated by a High-pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) by gradually increasing the gradient elution with acetonitrile. Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectroscopy (LC–MS/MS) analysis was performed on a Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC instrument (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60/90 minutes. The peptides were loaded onto a reversed-phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to a C18 reversed-phase analytical Easy Column (10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin; Thermo Scientific) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology, as described by Wang et al. (2020) and Lyu et al. (2022). After chromatographic separation, the sample was analyzed on a Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer in positive ion mode; the detailed methods used for detection are provided in Method S2. Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software with the MASCOT engine (version 2.2; Matrix Science, London, UK) was used for the identification and quantitation of proteins using the data for “Glycine_max” from the NCBI database.

### Publication Abstract
The regulatory effects of uneven phosphorus supplies on phosphorus transport in soybean roots are still unclear. To further analyze the regulatory effects of low-phosphorus stress on phosphorus transport in soybean roots and the effects of uneven phosphorus application on the physiological mechanism of phosphorus transport in soybean roots, dual-root soybean plants were prepared via grafting, and a sand culture experiment was performed. From the unfolded cotyledon stage to the initial flowering stage, one side of each dual-root soybean system was irrigated with a low-phosphorus-concentration solution (phosphorus-application [P+] side), and the other side was irrigated with a phosphorus-free nutrient solution (phosphorus-free [P-] side); this setup allowed the study of the effects of different phosphorus supply levels on the expression of genes and proteins and the accumulation of metabolites in soybean roots on the P- side to clarify the method through which phosphorus transport is regulated in soybean roots and to provide a theoretical basis for improving the use rate of phosphorus fertilizer. The results revealed that the unilateral supply of low-concentration phosphorus promoted the uptake of phosphorus by soybean roots and the transport of phosphorus from the P+ side to the P- side. Compared with the normal concentration of phosphorus supply and the phosphorus-free supply, the low concentration phosphorus supply affected the regulation of the metabolic pathways involved in starch and sucrose metabolism, glycolysis, fructose, and mannose metabolism, etc., thereby affecting soybean root phosphorus transport. The low-phosphorus stress inhibited fructose synthesis and sucrose synthase synthesis in the soybean roots and the synthesis of hexokinase (HK) and fructose kinase, which catalyzes the conversion of fructose to fructose-6-phosphate. Low-phosphorus stress promoted the synthesis of sucrose invertase and the conversion of sucrose into maltose by the activity of starch synthase (StS) and stimulated the synthesis of UDPG pyrophosphorylase (UGP) and phosphoglucose isomerase (GP1), which is involved in the conversion of UDP-glucose to glucose-6-phosphate. The phosphorus transport pathway of soybean roots was then affected, which promoted phosphorus allocation to UTP and glucose-6-phosphate. Additionally, low-phosphorus stress hastened glycolysis in the soybean roots and inhibited the synthesis of malic acid, thereby promoting the transport of phosphorus in the roots. In addition, low-phosphorus stress inhibited the synthesis of fructose, mannose, and mannose-1-phosphate and the synthesis of other enzymes involved in phosphorus transport as well as invertase, thereby inhibiting the transport and synthesis of several organic phosphorus-containing compounds.

### Keywords
Low phosphorus stress，phosphorus transport，transcriptomics，proteomics，metabonomics

### Affiliations
Northeast Agricultural University
College of Agriculture, Northeast Agricultural University

### Submitter
Hongyu LI

### Lab Head
Dr Li Hongyu
Northeast Agricultural University


