### Accession
PXD036582

### Title
The endothelial inflammatory repertoire: a multi-omic delineation of cytokine induced endothelial inflammatory states

### Description
Vascular endothelial cells (ECs) form a dynamic interface between blood and tissue and play a crucial role in the progression of vascular inflammation. Here, we explored the underlying molecular mechanisms of endothelial-cytokine responses which govern inflammation. Applying an unbiased cytokine library, we determined TNFα and IFNγ induced the largest EC response and had distinct proteomic inflammatory signatures. Moreover, combined TNFα + IFNγ stimulation induced a third synergetic inflammatory state. We employed a multi-omics approach combining (phospho-) proteome, transcriptome and secretome to delineate these inflammatory states and found that endothelial cells contain a wide-array of immune-modulating capacities such as complement proteins, MHCI and MHCII complexes and distinct secretory cytokine production per stimulus. Synergy was regulated through cooperative interplay of transcript induction. This extensive resource describes the intricate molecular mechanisms that are at the basis of endothelial inflammation and supports the adaptive immunomodulatory role of the endothelium in host defense and vascular inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
BOECs were isolated and cultured as described previously in Béguin et al., 2019. ECs were cultured in endothelial cell growth medium (PromoCell) supplemented with 18% FCS (HiCult). For SILAC labeling, BOECs were maintained for 5 passages as previously described using EBM-2 medium (Lonza), containing 18% FCS (passages 1-3) or 1 kDa dialyzed FCS (passages 4-5, Bodinco) and isotope labeled amino acids (light: Arg0 & Lys0, medium: Arg6 & Lys4, heavy: Arg10 & Lys8, Cambridge Isotopes). SILAC BOECs were serum starved for 2 hours prior to stimulation. For secretome analysis BOEC cells stimulation was done in phenol-free EGM2. All recombinant human cytokines were obtained from Peprotech. For the cytokine screen and mixed cytokines response experiments, cells were stimulated with 10 ng/ml per cytokine for indicated timepoints. Dose response experiments, cells were stimulated for 24h at 1, 10 and 100 ng/ml. For mass spectrometry analysis of EC proteomes, cells were lysed in 1% SDC, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 supplemented with 1x HALT protease/phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo). Lysates were incubated for 5 min at 95 °C and sonicated for 10 min in a sonifier bath, after which trypsin (Promega) was added in a 1:50 (w/w) protein ratio. For secretome analysis, samples were worked up as described in Deshmukh et al., 2019. After filtering, collected supernatants were spun down at 10’000 g to remove cell debris prior to freezing. Proteins were digested with 0.5 ug LysC/Trypsin (Themo) overnight. Peptides were desalted with C18 cartridges according to manufacturers’ instructions and where applicable phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges as described by Post et al., 2017 on an AssayMAP BRAVO (Agilent). Peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) via a nanoelectrospray ion source at 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid and buffer B of 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile. For label free analysis peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nL/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 min at 5% buffer B (17–22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5–27.5% (22–122 min) and 27.5–40% (122–132 min), followed by a 5 min wash to 95% and a 6 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120,000 resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4 × 105 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole, with isolation window 0.7, higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30 and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The tandem mass spectrometry (MS2) ion count target was set to 3×104, and the max injection time was 20 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software (Thermo) For phosphoproteomics acquisition of SILAC labeled samples tryptic peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 min at 5% buffer B (17–22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5 to 15% (22–87 min) and 15–38% (87–147 min), followed by a 10 min wash to 90% and a 5 min regeneration to 5%.  Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1750 m/z were performed at 240 K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 2×105 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 1.6, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the orbitrap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 105 and the max injection time was 60 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top N mode. For SILAC proteome samples a slightly adjusted protocol was used: peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 min at 5% buffer B (17–22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5 to 28% (22–80 min) and 28–40% (80–85 min), followed by a 5 min wash to 95% and a 5 min regeneration to 5%.  Survey scan was set to 240 K with a 1×106 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed on the 10 most intense ions by isolation using the quadrupole and analysis in the ion trap at a resolution of 30 K. The MS2 ion count target was set to 5×104 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, 1.6.2.10. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (release 2019). Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), IBAQ, and unique peptides for quantification were selected. For SILAC samples multiplicity was set to 3 (for Arg0 & Lys0, Arg6 & Lys4 and Arg10 & Lys8) and the re-quantify option was enabled, where applicable Phospho STY was set a dynamic modification. Data was analyzed using R 3.5.2 / RStudio 1.1.456. For label free data, ‘reverse’, ‘potential contaminants’ and ‘only identified by site’ peptides were filtered out. Proteins and phosphosites were filtered for at least 100% valid values per experimental group. LFQ values were transformed in log2 scale. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Batch effects were corrected for using ComBat in the sva package. Label free statistical analyses were preformed using LIMMA. For SILAC data analysis statistical analysis was performed using a linear model without intercept on non-imputed data. For clustering purposes, missing values were imputed by linear approximation using the Amelia package. For both label free and SILAC data, a Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) adjusted p < 0.05 and an absolute log2 fold change > 1 was considered significant and relevant. Co-expression analysis was performed using the WGCNA package using signed network and a soft power of 4, minClusterSize was set to 10. Gene ontology term enrichment and pathway analyses were performed using clusterPofiler and rWikiPathways  packages.

### Publication Abstract
Vascular endothelial cells (ECs) form a dynamic interface between blood and tissue and play a crucial role in the progression of vascular inflammation. Here, we aim to dissect the system-wide molecular mechanisms of inflammatory endothelial-cytokine responses. Applying an unbiased cytokine library, we determined that TNF&#x3b1; and IFN&#x3b3; induced the largest EC response resulting in distinct proteomic inflammatory signatures. Notably, combined TNF&#x3b1;&#x2009;+&#x2009;IFN&#x3b3; stimulation induced an additional synergetic inflammatory signature. We employed a multi-omics approach to dissect these inflammatory states, combining (phospho-) proteome, transcriptome and secretome and found, depending on the stimulus, a wide-array of altered immune-modulating processes, including complement proteins, MHC complexes and distinct secretory cytokines. Synergy resulted in cooperative activation of transcript induction. This resource describes the intricate molecular mechanisms that are at the basis of endothelial inflammation and supports the adaptive immunomodulatory role of the endothelium in host defense and vascular inflammation.

### Keywords
Mult-omics, Inflammation, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Sanquin Research
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Stijn Groten

### Lab Head
Dr Maartje van den Biggelaar, PhD
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands


