### Accession
PXD042154

### Title
Blood RNAs predictive of molecular changes in the brain and clinical outcome in Parkinson’s disease

### Description
The ability to use blood to predict the outcomes of Parkinson’s disease (PD), including disease progression and development of cognitive and motor complications, would be of enormous clinical value. We undertook deep RNA sequencing from the caudate and putamen of postmortem PD (n=35) and control (n=40) striatum, and compared molecular profiles with clinical features, and samples obtained from antemortem peripheral blood from an independent cohort. Cognitive and motor complications of PD were associated with molecular changes in the caudate (e.g., stress response) and putamen (endothelial pathways) respectively. Later and earlier-onset PD were molecularly distinct, and disease duration was associated with changes in caudate (oligodendrocyte development) and putamen (cellular senescence) respectively. Molecular signatures in the postmortem PD brain were also evident in antemortem peripheral blood, and correlated with clinical disease features. Together, these findings identify molecular signatures in PD patients' brain and blood of potential pathophysiologic and prognostic importance

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 35 mg brain tissue was homogenized in an 8 M urea lysis buffer (8 M                 urea,  100 mM Na2HPO4, pH 8.5) with HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor                cocktail (ThermoFisher). Following sonication and centrifugation, protein concentration                and integrity of the supernatant was tested by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce)                 and gel electrophoresis, respectively  Proteins were reduced and alkylated and extracted with chloroform/water/methanol extraction. Peptides were labeled with TMTpro and fractionated with a combination of SCX and high-pH RP before injection on LC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were queried against the homo sapiens proteome concatenated  with common contaminants at 1% FDR. Quantitation was performed using reporter ions from fragment  spectra, requiring a spectral purity of 75%. Quantitative values for proteins were log2 transformed. It was  required that a protein be observed in at least 5 replicates in at least one group. The protein isoform with  the highest expression was used. After this filtering, 6994 (caudate) and 5183 (putamen) proteins  remained. Missing values were imputed with random low-abundant values from a normal distribution.  Values were normalized to the median for each channel by subtraction. Significance was tested using  permutation-based FDR-corrected t-tests (FDR 0.05)

### Publication Abstract
The ability to use blood to predict the outcomes of Parkinson's disease, including disease progression and cognitive and motor complications, would be of significant clinical value. We undertook bulk RNA sequencing from the caudate and putamen of postmortem Parkinson's disease (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;35) and control (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;40) striatum, and compared molecular profiles with clinical features and bulk RNA sequencing data obtained from antemortem peripheral blood. Cognitive and motor complications of Parkinson's disease were associated with molecular changes in the caudate (stress response) and putamen (endothelial pathways) respectively. Later and earlier-onset Parkinson's disease were molecularly distinct, and disease duration was associated with changes in caudate (oligodendrocyte development) and putamen (cellular senescence), respectively. Transcriptome patterns in the postmortem Parkinson's disease brain were also evident in antemortem peripheral blood, and correlated with clinical features of the disease. Together, these findings identify molecular signatures in Parkinson's disease patients' brain and blood of potential pathophysiologic and prognostic importance.

### Keywords
Striatum, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Research Support Specialist
Laboratory of Molecular Neuro-oncology, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New  York, NY 10065

### Submitter
Soren Heissel

### Lab Head
Dr Robert B. Darnell
Laboratory of Molecular Neuro-oncology, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New  York, NY 10065


