### Accession
PXD009900

### Title
PP2A  inhibition  is  a  druggable  MEK  inhibitor  resistance mechanism  in  KRAS-mutant  lung  cancer  cells

### Description
TiO2-enriched and non-enriched samples and a pooled TiO2-enriched alkaline phosphatase treated sample from subconfluent A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells line.  Cells were subjected to on of the 6 different treatments: Control sample, RNAi mediated depletion of PPP2R1A, CIP2A, or PME-1, and treatment with 100nM Trametinib for 20 hours for control and PPP2R1A depleted cells. Each condition was performed in triplicates with different siRNA sequences.

### Sample Protocol
Described previously in: Kauko O, Laajala TD, Jumppanen M, Hintsanen P, Suni V, Haapaniemi P, Corthals G, Aittokallio T, Westermarck J, Imanishi SY, Label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics with novel pairwise abundance normalization reveals synergistic RAS and CIP2A signaling. Sci Rep, 5():13099(2015)

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins and peptides for LC-MS/MS data of the TiO2-enriched and non-enriched samples was performed using Mascot (v2.4.1) via Proteome Discoverer (v1.4.1.14) where forward-reverse SwissProt database (v2012_04, Homo sapiens) supplemented with common contaminants was used. PhoshoRS node (v3.0) in Proteome Discoverer was enabled for phosphorylation site localization.  Spectral library searching was performed using an in-house made spectral library of simulated phosphopeptides using SimPhospho program (refer to PXD000474) from a pooled dephosphorylated sample. And then a consensus spectral library as well as the library supplemented with decoy entries was built using SpectraST (version 4.8.0). (File names: Alkaline_phosphatase_consensus.splib  and Alkaline_phosphatase_cons_decoy.splib). SpectraST searching results for the TiO2-enriched samples was obtained by enabling Percolator in the Proteome Discoverer. The spectral library supplemented with decoy entries was used in the stand-alone SpectraST to obtain F-value and recalculated deltaDot scores that are required for phosphorylation site localization.  The mascot and spectraST results were exported after applying Mascot expectation value ≤0.05, Percolator PEP ≤0.05, minimum 7 amino acid length, search engine rank 1, and protein grouping. As employed in previous scoring scheme (refer to PXD001374)  for 1% FLR (i.e. high confidence phosphorylation sites),  phosphoRS probability ≥99.3% was used, while SpectraST (stand-alone) F-value ≥0.49 and recalculated deltaDot score ≥0.005 were applied only when a singly phosphorylated peptide contains >1 Ser/Thr/Tyr in its sequence. A new score was assigned for each phosphopeptide spectral match (labelled "xcorr" in the xlsx file) before proteomic analysis with Progenesis QI software.

### Publication Abstract
Kinase inhibitor resistance constitutes a major unresolved clinical challenge in cancer. Furthermore, the role of serine/threonine phosphatase deregulation as a potential cause for resistance to kinase inhibitors has not been thoroughly addressed. We characterize protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) activity as a global determinant of KRAS-mutant lung cancer cell resistance across a library of &gt;200 kinase inhibitors. The results show that PP2A activity modulation alters cancer cell sensitivities to a large number of kinase inhibitors. Specifically, PP2A inhibition ablated mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitor response through the collateral activation of AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling. Combination of mTOR and MEK inhibitors induced cytotoxicity in PP2A-inhibited cells, but even this drug combination could not abrogate MYC up-regulation in PP2A-inhibited cells. Treatment with an orally bioavailable small-molecule activator of PP2A DT-061, in combination with the MEK inhibitor AZD6244, resulted in suppression of both p-AKT and MYC, as well as tumor regression in two KRAS-driven lung cancer mouse models. DT-061 therapy also abrogated MYC-driven tumorigenesis. These data demonstrate that PP2A deregulation drives MEK inhibitor resistance in KRAS-mutant cells. These results emphasize the need for better understanding of phosphatases as key modulators of cancer therapy responses.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Lung cancer, A549, Pp2a

### Affiliations
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland
UTU

### Submitter
Laxman Yetukuri

### Lab Head
Dr Jukka Westermarck (lab head) Laxman yetukuri (submitted)
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland


