### Accession
PXD034175

### Title
Discovering biomarkers for non-alcoholic steatohepatitis pa-tients with and without hepatocellular carcinoma using fecal metaproteomics

### Description
High-calorie diets lead hepatic steatosis and to the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), which can evolve over many years into the inflammatory form non-alcoholic steatohepatits (NASH) posing a risk for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Due to the diet and the liver alteration, the axis between liver and gut is disturbed, resulting in gut microbiome alterations. Consequently, detecting these gut microbiome alterations repre-sents a promising strategy for early NASH and HCC detection. We analyzed medical parame-ters and the fecal metaproteome of 19 healthy controls, 32 NASH, and 29 HCC patients target-ing the discovery of diagnostic biomarkers. Here, NASH and HCC resulted in increased in-flammation status and shifts within the composition of the gut microbiome. Increased abun-dance of kielin/chordin, E3 ubiquitin ligase, and nucleophosmin 1 represented valuable fecal biomarkers indicating disease-related changes in the liver. Whereas a single biomarker failed to separate NASH and HCC, machine learning-based classification algorithms provided 0.86% accuracy in distinguishing between controls, NASH, and HCC. Conclusion: Fecal metaproteomics enables early detection of NASH and HCC by providing single biomarkers and ma-chine learning-based metaprotein panels.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from approx. 100 - 200 mg stool samples were extracted by cell lysis and phenol extraction as described in Lehmann et al. [15]. After FASP digestion [40], LC-MS / MS analysis was performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano splitless liquid chromatography system coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite ™ hybrid ion trap Orbitrap-MS (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using a 120 min gradient. All chemicals used had at least analysis quality and the solvents used for LC-MS / MS MS quality.

### Data Protocol
The MetaProteomeAnalyzer (version 3.1) [40] was used for the protein identification, which included the search engines X! Tandem, OMSSA, and Mascot and the following parameters: enzyme trypsin, a lack of cleavage, monoisotopic mass, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) as a fixed modification, oxidation (methionine) as a variable modification, ± 10 ppm precursor and ± 0.5 Da MS / MS fragment tolerance, 1 13 C, + 2 / + 3 charged peptide ions and a false detection rate of 1%. The used protein databases are the UniProtKB / SwissProt database (as of 16/01/2019) and the gut microbiome database by Qin et al. (2010  ) [REF]. A BLAST search (NCBI-Blast version 2.2.31) against UniProtKB / SwissProt was carried out for proteins that could not be annotated taxonomically or functionally. All BLAST hits with the best E-value that were at least below 10-4 were combined and used to annotate the protein identifications. Redundant ho-mologous protein identifications were combined into a protein group (hereinafter referred to as metaprotein) if they had at least one peptide identification in common.

### Publication Abstract
High-calorie diets lead to hepatic steatosis and to the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), which can evolve over many years into the inflammatory form of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), posing a risk for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Due to diet and liver alteration, the axis between liver and gut is disturbed, resulting in gut microbiome alterations. Consequently, detecting these gut microbiome alterations represents a promising strategy for early NASH and HCC detection. We analyzed medical parameters and the fecal metaproteome of 19 healthy controls, 32 NASH patients, and 29 HCC patients, targeting the discovery of diagnostic biomarkers. Here, NASH and HCC resulted in increased inflammation status and shifts within the composition of the gut microbiome. An increased abundance of kielin/chordin, E3 ubiquitin ligase, and nucleophosmin 1 represented valuable fecal biomarkers, indicating disease-related changes in the liver. Although a single biomarker failed to separate NASH and HCC, machine learning-based classification algorithms provided an 86% accuracy in distinguishing between controls, NASH, and HCC. Fecal metaproteomics enables early detection of NASH and HCC by providing single biomarkers and machine learning-based metaprotein panels.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Fecal microbiota, Ma-chine learning, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis

### Affiliations
OvGU
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg

### Submitter
Robert Heyer

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Benndorf
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg


