### Accession
PXD003533

### Title
Human plasma peptidomics -  Identification and quantification of plasma free salusin-β, an endogenous parasympathomimetic peptide

### Description
We have improved our ultrahigh-yield method, which we named “differential solubilization" (J Proteome Res 9, 2010, 1694-1705), to extract and analyse low-molecular-weight plasma peptides, and initiated a large-scale sequencing of circulating native peptides at concentrations as low as the picomolar level using less than 200 μl of human plasma.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples were taken from four healthy volunteers into vacutainers containing Na2-EDTA and separated immediately in a refrigerated centrifuge at 1,000 g for 20 min. Aliquots were immediately flash-frozen with liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until processing. Informed consent was obtained from the volunteers. Thawed plasma was processed essentially according to the differential solubilization method, but with the following modifications. A 50-μl plasma sample was diluted 1:2 with 100 μl of denaturing solution (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 20 mM dithiothreitol), slowly dropped into 2 ml ice-cold acetone, immediately stirred at 4 °C for 1 h and centrifuged at 19,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The precipitate was resuspended in 1 ml of 80% acetonitrile containing 12 mM HCl, mixed at 4 °C for 2 h and centrifuged again at 19,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The low molecular weight peptides fraction, eluted into the supernatant, was lyophilized and stored at −80 °C until use. Enriched eluates with or without the reductive alkylation procedure were either directly analysed by liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) or subjected to reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) to be pre-separated into 8 or 13 fractions by a 'cyclic sample pooling technique' prior to the LC-MS/MS experiment. RP-HPLC prefractionated and non-fractionated samples were injected onto a C18 0.075- × 20-mm trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then eluted onto a C18 0.075- × 120-mm analytical column (Nano HPLC Capillary Column; Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) configured to an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The flow rate of the mobile phase was 300 nl/min; mobile phase (A) consisted of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase (B) consisted of 0.1% formic acid/90% acetonitrile. After sample introduction, the ratio of these solvents was programmed to change in 54-, 70-, 90-, 120-, 165- and 215-min cycles. Separated peptides were subjected to Q-Exactive™ (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full-scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. The 12 most intense full-scan peaks were selected with an isolation window of 1.6 Da or 2.4 Da. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 2 kV; no sheath or auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250 °C.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data obtained from a total of all 189 runs were classified to four MS groups (MS data groups 1–4). Each MS group data was searched against the SwissProt_2015_02.fasta database (selected for Homo sapiens; 20,199 entries) using two different data processing pipelines and search engines, Mascot (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) and PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada). In the Mascot workflow, raw MS and MS/MS data files were processed using Mascot Distiller (version 2.5.1.0, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK). Data processing included peak picking, de-isotoping and charge deconvolution of fragment ions. The resulting peak list files were searched using the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1). The search parameters were as follows: enzyme, no enzyme; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C) (MS data groups 2 and 4); variable modifications, acetyl (N-term), amidated (C-term), oxidation (M); peptide ion mass tolerance, 6 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.02 Da. The identified peptides were searched against the randomized decoy database created by Mascot. In the PEAKS Studio workflow, the PEAKS Studio (version 7.0) was used to perform peak picking, de-isotoping, charge deconvolution of fragment ions and de novo peptide sequencing-based database search from MS and MS/MS spectra of peptides. The search parameters were as follows: enzyme, no enzyme; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C) (MS data groups 1 and 3); variable modifications, acetyl (N-term), amidated (C-term), oxidation (M); peptide ion mass tolerance, 6 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.02 Da. The PEAKS' PTM algorithm was applied to identify variable modifications. The FDR was set as 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Salusin-&#x3b2; is an endogenous parasympathomimetic proatherosclerotic peptide. Salusin-&#x3b2; was initially predicted from bioinformatic analyses and later immunologically detected in human biofluids. However, elucidation of salusin-&#x3b2; bioactivity has faced enormous challenges because of its unique physicochemical characteristics that cause it to strongly adhere to laboratory apparatus materials. In the strictest sense, the discovery of bioactive peptides is not complete until their exact native sequences have been confirmed in the peripheral circulation. In this study, we determined the plasma molecular form and levels of free salusin-&#x3b2; to determine its pathophysiological significance. Ultra-high-yield enrichment and preseparation of non-tryptic human plasma was followed by LC-MS/MS, and full-length salusin-&#x3b2; and seven different endogenous fragment sequences were identified. We established a new ELISA that specifically detects plasma free salusin-&#x3b2; without cross-reacting with any of its identified endogenous fragments. Free salusin-&#x3b2; levels exhibited a profound early morning nadir and rapidly decreased in response to parasympathetic nervous augmentation. Our technical advance in plasma native peptide analysis successfully identified a hard-to-detect bioactive peptide, salusin-&#x3b2;, together with its formerly unrecognized fragments, and further suggests that conventional immunological measurements of target peptides may not be fully representative.

### Keywords
Native peptide, Plasma, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Center for Disease Proteomics, Kitasato University School of Science, 1-15-1 Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 252-0373, Japan.
School of Science, Kitasato University

### Submitter
Yoshio Kodera

### Lab Head
Dr Yoshio Kodera
Center for Disease Proteomics, Kitasato University School of Science, 1-15-1 Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 252-0373, Japan.


