### Accession
PXD005106

### Title
Comparative Proteomics of PairedVocal Fold and Oral Mucosa Fibroblasts

### Description
Injuries of the vocal folds frequently heal with scar formation, which can have lifelong detrimental impact on voice quality. Current treatments to prevent or resolve scars of the vocal fold mucosa are highly unsatisfactory. In contrast, the adjacent oral mucosa is mostly resistant to scarring. These differences in healing tendency might relate to distinct properties of the fibroblasts populating oral and vocal fold mucosae. We thus established the in vitro cultivation of paired, near-primary vocal fold fibroblasts (VFF) and oral mucosa fibroblasts (OMF) to perform a basic cellular characterization and comparative cellular proteomics. VFF were significantly larger than OMF, proliferated more slowly, and exhibited a sustained TGF-β1-induced elevation of pro-fibrotic interleukin 6. Cluster analysis of the proteomic data revealed distinct protein repertoires specific for VFF and OMF. Further, VFF displayed a broader protein spectrum, particularly a more sophisticated array of factors constituting and modifying the extracellular matrix. Conversely, subsets of OMF-enriched proteins were linked to cellular proliferation, nuclear events, and protection against oxidative stress. Altogether, this study supports the notion that fibroblasts sensitively adapt to the functional peculiarities of their respective anatomical location and presents several molecular targets for further investigation in the context of vocal fold wound healing.

### Sample Protocol
Pairs of VFF and OMF with similar passage numbers were seeded into T75 cell culture flasks (Greiner). At ~50% optical confluence, old medium was removed and cells were washed twice with PBS before addition of fresh DMEM/ F12 Nutrient Mix (3:1). After incubation for 6 h, cells were trypsinized and the resulting cell suspension was centrifuged at 170 * g for 7 min. Supernatants were discarded and cell pellets were resuspended in PBS, followed by determination of cell concentration and centrifugation as before. Supernatants were thoroughly removed, cell pellets were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. One million cells were lysed in 100 µL lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide and 1 % SDS) by sonication for 2 min on ice. The lysates were heat denatured for 10 min at 90 °C. The supernatants were collected after removal of cell debris by centrifugation at 1000 * g for 10 min at room temperature). Protein was determined by BCA-RAC assay (Thermo Scientific). Protein patterns a were visualized by SDS-PAGE on 4-12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific), Krypton (Thermo Fisher Scientific) staining and fluorescence laser scanning on a Bio-Rad FX Pro Plus Imager. For LC-MS/MS analysis 20 µg protein were subjected to filter aided sample preparation as described previously15 with minor modifications using 3 kD cut off ultracentrifugation filters (Millipore). Buffer was exchanged three times with 8 M Urea, 100 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.0. The samples were predigested with rLysC (Promega, enzyme/protein 1:100) for 4 hours at 37°C, diluted to 2 M Urea with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin (Promega, enzyme/ protein 1:50) overnight. Peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14000 * g for 45 min at room temperature,. 500 ng per sample were acidified with formic acid (final concentration of 0.1 %) and analyzed by nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000) equipped with a C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 5 x 0.3 mm, enrichment column and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanocolumn (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 500 x 0.075 mm) (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated on the enrichment column for 2 min at a flow rate of 5 µl/min with 0.1 % heptafluorobutyric acid as isocratic solvent. Separation was carried out on the nanocolumn at a flow rate of 300 nl/min at 60 °C using the following gradient, where solvent A is 0.1 % formic acid in water and solvent B is acetonitrile containing 0.1 % formic acid: 0-6 min: 4 % B; 6-150 min: 4-25 % B; 150 -155 min: 25-95 % B, 155 – 165 min: 95 % B; 165-165.1 min: 4 % B; 165.1-180 min: 4% B; The maXis II ETD mass spectrometer (Bruker, Vienna, Austria) was operated with the captive source in positive mode with following settings: mass range: 200 - 2000 m/z, 2 Hz, capillary 1300V, dry gas flow 3 L/min with 150 °C, nanoBooster 0.2 bar, precursor acquisition control top17.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analyzed by the Data analysis software (Bruker), using the Sum Peak algorithm, and by MaxQuant by searching the public Uniprot database with taxonomy ovis aries (downloaded on 13.06.2016, 13148561 residues, 27448 sequences) and common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was entered as fixed modification, oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 0.006 Da; product mass tolerance +/- 40 ppm; acceptance parameters for identification: 1 % PSM false discovery rate (FDR); 1 % protein FDR. In addition a label free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant16 requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides. The mass spectrometry data have been submitted to the ProteomeXChange consortium via the proteomics identification database (PRIDE) repository. Further processing, data visualization, and statistical testing were performed with R (www.r-project.org). Briefly, identified common contaminant peptides were removed, and UniProtKB AC/IDs of the remaining hits were mapped to their respective gene symbols using the “Retrieve/ID mapping” function of www.uniprot.org. Spectra that were associated to different gene symbols were reduced to a single gene symbol based on the following criteria: (i) highest number of peptide counts (razor+unique); (ii) highest sequence coverage. Hierarchical Clustering was performed using the “complete linkage” method (hclust function of the R stats package). Gene Ontology (GO) term overrepresentation analysis was performed using the “Gene List Analysis” tool17 from www.pantherdb.org with default settings. For proteins identified in both cell types, log2-transformed fold changes of label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity values were calculated for each VFF-OMF pair (pFC). Proteins were filtered for differential abundance (|mean(pFC)| > 0.58) and a paired t-test was conducted for hits where 3-4 pFC could be calculated, followed by applying the Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)18,19 was  conducted using the javaGSEA desktop application with preset values of gene set sizes. Gene sets with a FDR-corrected p-value (FDR-q) < 0.1 were considered as significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wound healing, Vocal folds, Scar, Fibrosis, Lamina propria, Fibroblasts, Oral mucosa, Laryngology

### Affiliations
Omics Center Graz
Research Unit "Functional Proteomics and Metabolic Pathways", Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria; Austrian Center of Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Petersgasse 14, 8010 Graz, Austria, Omics Center Graz, Austria

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Research Unit "Functional Proteomics and Metabolic Pathways", Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria; Austrian Center of Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Petersgasse 14, 8010 Graz, Austria, Omics Center Graz, Austria


