### Accession
PXD002785

### Title
Tag-Free Identification of Protease Specificity Using Proteome-Derived Peptide Libraries

### Description
Proteome-derived peptide libraries are a powerful tool for the investigation of protease specificity, conventionally involving the biotinylation of cleavage products to enable for their enrichment. Here we present a modified strategy for protease specificity profiling using proteome-derived peptide libraries in a tag-free manner. In comparison to the original method the new protocol is faster, avoids cost- and time-intensive enrichment steps, and enables probing for lysine selectivity. In the new workflow, peptide libraries are generated by endoproteolytic digestion of proteomes without chemical modification of primary amines prior to exposure to a protease under investigation. After incubation with the test protease, treated and control library are differentially labeled using stable isotopes by means of reductive dimethylation. Upon analysis by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry, cleavage products of the test protease appear as peptides enriched for the respective isotopic label. With “PICS 2.0” we identified more than 2800 cleavage sites in five specificity experiments for four proteases, including trypsin, caspase-3, and chlamydial protease-like activity factor (CPAF). Hence, this method is a valuable addition to the different strategies currently employed for specificity profiling of proteases

### Sample Protocol
Escherichia coli MG1655 was grown in Luria–Bertani (LB) medium. Cells were lysed and lysates were digested by either trypsin or GluC as described elsewhere (10). GluC digests were performed in the presence of 1.0 μM tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone and 1.0 μM tosyl-L-lysine chloromethyl ketone hydrochloride. Following digestion, primary amines were not modified. The peptide digest was further purified by C18 solid phase extraction (Sep-Pak, Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Aliquots of the peptide library were stored in water at -80 ° C.  Protease:library ratios, incubation times and temperature are stated in the corresponding sections below. Between 100 and 300 μg of peptide library were used per assay. Incubation buffers were 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) for trypsin; 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, 10% (wt/vol) sucrose for caspase-3, and 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT for chlamydial protease-like activity factor. After incubation, the test protease was heat-inactivated. Protease-treated and control samples were isotopically labeled by reductive dimethylation using H2CO or D2C13O, respectively, as described elsewhere (27, 28). Following labeling, protease-treated and control samples were mixed at equal ratios and desalted by C18 solid phase extraction (Sep-Pak, Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data was converted to the mzXML format, using msconvert  with centroiding of MS1 and MS2 data and deisotoping of MS2 data. For spectrum to sequence assignment X! Tandem (Version 2013.09.01) was used. The E. coli proteome database (strain K12, reference proteome) was used as described previously, consisting of 4304 protein entries and 8608 randomized sequences, derived from the original E. coli proteome entries. The decoy sequences were generated with the software DB toolkit. X! Tandem parameters included: precursor mass error of ± 10 ppm (Q-Exactive), fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm (Q-Exactive), semi-tryptic, semi-GluC or semi-LysC specificity with up to one missed cleavage, static residue modifications: cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02 Da); lysine and N-terminal dimethylation (light formaldehyde 28.03 Da; heavy formaldehyde 34.06 Da or 36.08 Da, respectively); no variable modifications. X!Tandem results were further validated by PeptideProphet at a confidence level of > 95 %. For relative peptide quantification, XPRESS was used. Mass tolerance for quantification was 0.015 Da. An in-house PERL computer script then filters for semi-specific peptides, with their N- or C-terminus generated by the initial digestion protease and the respective other terminus derived from cleavage by the test protease. Similar to the original PICS procedure, the script then determines bioinformatically, through database lookup, the corresponding prime- or non-prime sequence. Web-PICS was used to generate heat-map style representation of protease specificity.

### Publication Abstract
We present protease specificity profiling based on quantitative proteomics in combination with proteome-derived peptide libraries. Peptide libraries are generated by endoproteolytic digestion of proteomes without chemical modification of primary amines before exposure to a protease under investigation. After incubation with a test protease, treated and control libraries are differentially isotope-labeled using cost-effective reductive dimethylation. Upon analysis by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, cleavage products of the test protease appear as semi-specific peptides that are enriched for the corresponding isotope label. We validate our workflow with two proteases with well-characterized specificity profiles: trypsin and caspase-3. We provide the first specificity profile of a protease encoded by a human endogenous retrovirus and for chlamydial protease-like activity factor (CPAF). For CPAF, we also highlight the structural basis of negative subsite cooperativity between subsites S1 and S2'. For A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS) -4, -5, and -15, we show a canonical preference profile, including glutamate in P1 and glycine in P3'. In total, we report nearly 4000 cleavage sites for seven proteases. Our protocol is fast, avoids enrichment or synthesis steps, and enables probing for lysine selectivity as well as subsite cooperativity. Due to its simplicity, we anticipate usability by most proteomic laboratories.

### Keywords
Proteolysis

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
University of Freiburg


