### Accession
PXD017962

### Title
The gain-of-function allele bamAE470K bypasses the essential requirement for BamD in β-barrel outer membrane protein assembly

### Description
The outer membrane (OM) of Gram-negative bacteria confers innate resistance to toxins and antibiotics. Integral -barrel outer membrane proteins (OMPs) are assembled into the OM by the beta-barrel assembly machine (BAM), which is composed of one OMP, BamA, and four lipoproteins, BamBCDE.  BamBCE can be removed individually with only minor effects on barrier function.  However, depletion of BamA or BamD, the only BAM components conserved in all diderm bacteria, causes a global defect in OMP assembly and results in cell death.  We have identified a gain-of-function mutation, bamAE470K, that bypasses the requirement for BamD.  Although bamD::kan bamAE470K cells exhibit growth defects, they assemble OMPs with surprising robustness.  Our results demonstrate that the reactions required for beta-barrel folding and membrane integration are catalyzed solely by BamA.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared as previously described. Cells were grown in suspension to exponential phase (OD600 ~0.5-0.8) in LB at 30 C. Samples were normalized by OD600.  Cells were harvested by pelleting at room temperature and flash frozen. Each pellet containing ~200 ug (~9x108 cells) of total protein was resuspended in 200uL of lysis buffer containing 50mM HEPES pH 7.2, 2% CTAB (hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide), 6M GuaCl (guanidine hydrochloride), and 5mM DTT. Cells were lysed by sonication: 10 pulses, 30 seconds, at 60% amplitude and further heating the lysate at 60C for 20 minutes.  Next, 200uL of lysate from every condition was methanol-chloroform precipitated. Protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo Fisher). The samples were resuspended in 6M guanidine chloride in 10mM EPPS pH 8.5 with a subsequent dilution to 2M guanidine chloride in 10mM EPPS pH 8.5 for digestion with Lys-C (Wako, Japan) at room temperature with 20ng/uL Lys-C overnight. The samples were further diluted to 0.5mM guanidine chloride in 10mM EPPS pH 8.5 in 10mM EPPS pH 8.5 and digested with 20ng/uL Lys-C and 10ng/uL trypsin at 37C overnight.  The digested samples were dried using a vacuum evaporator at room temperature and taken up in 200mM EPPS pH 8.0 for a pH shift which is necessary for optimal labeling conditions. 10uL of total material from each condition were labeled with 3uL of 20ng/uL TMT.  TMT reagents were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile. TMT samples were labeled for 2 hours at room temperature. Labeled samples were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine solution (Sigma, St. Louis, MO).  Samples from all conditions were combined into one tube, acidified with 5% phosphoric acid (pH<2), and subjected to a subsequent spin at 16,000 relative centrifugal force (RCF) for 10 minutes at 4C.  The samples were dried using a vacuum evaporator at room temperature.  Dry samples were taken up in HPLC grade water and stage tipped for desalting. The samples were resuspended in 1% formic acid to 1 ug/uL and 1ug of the total combined sample was analyzed with the TMTc+ approach.

### Data Protocol
A suite of software tools developed in-house was used to convert mass spectrometric data from the Thermo RAW file to the mzXML format, as well as to correct erroneous assignments of peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z. Assignment of MS2 spectra was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm by searching the data against the appropriate proteome reference dataset acquired from UniProt including common contaminants like human keratins and trypsin. This forward database component was followed by a decoy component which included all listed protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance, where both peptide termini were required to be consistent with Trypsin or LysC specificity, while allowing one missed cleavage. Fragment ion tolerance in the MS2-spectrum was set at 0.02 Th (TMTc+), TMT was set as a static modification of lysine residues and peptides’ N-termini (+229.162932 Da), oxidation of methionine residues (+ 15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate of 0.5% was achieved by applying the target decoy database search strategy. Filtering was performed using a linear discrimination analysis with the following features: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and unique Δ XCorr, absolute peptide ion mass accuracy, peptide length, and charge state. Forward peptides within three standard deviation of the theoretical m/z of the precursor were used as positive training set. All reverse peptides were used as negative training set. Linear discrimination scores were used to sort peptides with at least seven residues and to filter with the desired cutoff. Furthermore, we performed a filtering step towards on the protein level by the “picked” protein FDR approach. Protein redundancy was removed by assigning peptides to the minimal number of proteins which can explain all observed peptides, with above described filtering criteria. We did not use isolation specificity filtering for the TMTc+ method, as coisolation of other peptides does not perturb the measurement results for this method. The probabilities of differential expression were calculated based on agreement between the underlying peptides and signal level of the peptides for every protein quantified in the experiment using the BACIQ software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lipoproteins, Outer membrane, Bamd, Mutation

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Princeton University 

### Submitter
Meera Gupta

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Wuhr
Princeton University


