### Accession
PXD019395

### Title
Atherosclerotic environment effect over CAC pre-angiogenic role

### Description
In response to vascular injury, early EPC or Circulating angiogenic cells (CAC) are thought to be recruited to the damaged areas, participating mainly in a paracrine fashion, by releasing pro-angiogenic factors, promoting the mobilization of other cell populations such as the late EPC, or endothelial colony-forming cells (ECFC). ECFC will help by replacing the damaged endothelium and promoting neovascularization. Unfortunately, however, despite the regenerative role, the number and function of EPC are severely affected under pathological conditions, making compulsory to better understand how these cells react under those environments in order to implement their use in regenerative cell therapies.  Herein we evaluated, for the first time to our knowledge, the effect of atherosclerotic factors over the paracrine role of CAC, by direct incubation ex vivo of healthy CAC with the secretome of atherosclerotic arteries. The application of a label free proteomics approach allowed the identification of 194 altered proteins in the secretome of pre-conditioned CAC, many of them related, among others, with inhibition of angiogenesis and cell migration. Functional assays corroborated that, after atherosclerotic pre-conditioning, the pro-angiogenic effect of CAC over ECFC was impaired, affecting ECFC migration as well as their ability to form tubules on a basement membrane matrix assay. Up-regulation of several anti-angiogenic proteins in the CAC secretome could help to explain such angiogenic switch which, in turns, could reflect a protective and beneficial effect against the atherosclerotic process.

### Sample Protocol
In total, 100 μg of proteins per sample were precipitated with 100% acetone, overnight at -20ºC. Pellets were collected by centrifugation at 13300 rpm for 20 min, 4ºC and resuspended in 6 M urea for further tryptic in-solution digestion. Proteins were reduced (200 mM DTT, 45 min) and alkylated (1M IAA, 45 min) before being diluted four times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:50) at 37ºC over-night. The reaction was quenched with 0.1% TFA and resulting peptides were desalted using C18 stage-tips. Peptides were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS, using a nano LC-Ultra 1D+ system (Eksigent) coupled to an Impact mass spectrometer (Bruker) via a Captive-spray source (Bruker) supplemented with a nano-Booster operated at 0.2 bar/min with isopropanol as dopant. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS (80-1600 m/z) and MS/MS (80-1600 m/z) scans using a top 30 method (threshold signal ≥ 500 counts, z ≥ 2 and m/z ≥ 350). An active exclusion of 30 sec was used. Precursor intensities were re-evaluated in the MS scan (n) regarding their values in the previous MS scan (n-1). Any m/z intensity exceeding 5 times the measured value in the preceding MS scan was reconsidered for MS/MS. Peptides were isolated using a 2 Th window and fragmented using collision induced dissociation (CID) with a collision energy of 23-56 eV as function of the m/z value.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.0.1) using standard settings searching against a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot) supplemented with contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines, oxidation of methionine, protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Label-free quantification was done with match between runs (match window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min). Afterwards, the “proteinGroup.txt” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.6.0.2) for further statistical analysis. A minimum of four LFQ valid values per group was required for quantification. Missing values were imputed from the observed normal distribution of intensities. Then, a two-sample Student’s T-Test with a permutation-based FDR was performed. Only proteins with a q-value<0.05 and log2 ratio >1.35 or < -1.35 were considered as differentially up or down-regulated.

### Publication Abstract
In atherosclerosis, circulating angiogenic cells (CAC), also known as early endothelial progenitor cells (eEPC), are thought to participate mainly in a paracrine fashion by promoting the recruitment of other cell populations such as late EPC, or endothelial colony-forming cells (ECFC), to the injured areas. There, ECFC replace the damaged endothelium, promoting neovascularization. However, despite their regenerative role, the number and function of EPC are severely affected under pathological conditions, being essential to further understand how these cells react to such environments in order to implement their use in regenerative cell therapies. Herein, we evaluated the effect of direct incubation ex vivo of healthy CAC with the secretome of atherosclerotic arteries. By using a quantitative proteomics approach, 194 altered proteins were identified in the secretome of pre-conditioned CAC, many of them related to inhibition of angiogenesis (e.g., endostatin, thrombospondin-1, fibulins) and cell migration. Functional assays corroborated that healthy CAC released factors enhanced ECFC angiogenesis, but, after atherosclerotic pre-conditioning, the secretome of pre-stimulated CAC negatively affected ECFC migration, as well as their ability to form tubules on a basement membrane matrix assay. Overall, we have shown here, for the first time, the effect of atherosclerotic factors over the paracrine role of CAC ex vivo. The increased release of angiogenic inhibitors by CAC in response to atherosclerotic factors induced an angiogenic switch, by blocking ECFC ability to form tubules in response to pre-conditioned CAC. Thus, we confirmed here that the angiogenic role of CAC is highly affected by the atherosclerotic environment.

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Atherosclerotic factors, Proteomics, Paracrine role, Circulating angiogenic cells, Secretome, Endothelial colony forming cells

### Affiliations
University of Cadiz

### Submitter
Carmen Duran

### Lab Head
Dr MªCarmen Duran-Ruiz
University of Cadiz


### SDRF

