### Accession
PXD043600

### Title
HYPK controls stability and catalytic activity of the N-terminal acetyltransferase A in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
The ribosome-tethered N-terminal acetyltransferase A (NatA) acetylates 52% of soluble proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana. This co-translational shielding of the N-terminus stabilizes diverse cytosolic plant proteins. The Huntingtin yeast partner K (HYPK) facilitates NatA activity in planta, but in vitro, the N-terminal a-helix1 of HYPK inhibits NatA in the ternary NatA/HYPK complex. Consequently, the mechanism of HYPK function in plants was unknown.  To understand the regulatory function of HYPK at the molecular level, we genetically engineered CRISPR/Cas9 mutants expressing either a non-functional HYPK (hypk-cr1) or an N-terminally deleted HYPK version (hypk-cr2). Like NatA-activity-depleted mutants, the hypk-cr1 and –cr2 mutants were more tolerant to drought stress and suffered from global proteome destabilization. Surprisingly, we found that absence of HYPK led to destabilization of the NatA subunits in leaves but not in roots of hypk-cr1. Further genetic and molecular evidence demonstrated that the stability of NatA subunits in leaves is mainly controlled by the C-terminal UBA domain of HYPK. While retaining the UBA domain, NatA activity was still impaired in hypk-cr2 leaves, implying that the N terminus of HYPK also contributes to the regulation of NatA activity. Furthermore, crossing of hypk-cr1 with a NatA-depleted mutant uncovered that HYPK promotes NatA activity not only by stabilizing NatA. Taken together, the activity-promoting function of the HYPK N-terminus depends on the binding of HYPK to NatA via the UBA domain, and is critical for NatA substrates starting with various amino acids. Our findings improve our understanding of the NatA regulatory subunit HYPK.

### Sample Protocol
The plant samples were processed following the SILProNAQ protocol described by Bienvenut et al. in Methods Mol Biol. (2017). Briefly, it is based on the chemical acetylation of all the naturally non-acetylated protein N-termini, using a heavy labeled reagent. This allows then for a calculation of an N-terminal acetylation proportion for each protein by comparing the amount of natural acetylation to that of artificial acetylation.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry spectra were acquired usin an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer, and the data files of each sample were processed together using the Mascot Distiller software, searching against the curated Araport-11 database, for protein identification and quantification. The results obtained from Mascot Distiller were then parsed using the eNcounter script to ahcieve the final N-terminal acetylation results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Co-translational protein modification, Nata, Drought resistance, N-terminal acetylation, Hypk

### Affiliations
Protein Maturation, Cell fate and Therapeutics, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CNRS UMR9198, Bâtiment 21, 1 Avenue de la Terrasse F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette CEDEX, France
Institut de Biologie Intégrative de la Cellule - CNRS

### Submitter
Jean Baptiste BOYER

### Lab Head
Dr Carmela GIGLIONE
Protein Maturation, Cell fate and Therapeutics, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CNRS UMR9198, Bâtiment 21, 1 Avenue de la Terrasse F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette CEDEX, France


