### Accession
PXD010480

### Title
Urine EV Phosphoproteomics -  Highly Efficient Phosphoproteome Capture and Analysis from Urinary Extracellular Vesicles

### Description
Capture of urinary EVs with EVtrap and analysis of their phosphoproteome

### Sample Protocol
Captured urine EVs by EVtrap, extracted proteins, digested and enriched phosphopeptides by PolyMAC before LC-MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Used PD 2.2 for database search with Bionic for ID and Sequest for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of protein phosphorylation in extracellular vesicles (EVs) offers an unprecedented potential for understanding cancer signaling and early stage disease diagnosis. However, prior to the phosphoproteome analysis step, the isolation of EVs from biofluids remains a challenging issue to overcome due to the low yield and impurity from current isolation methods. Here, we carry out an extensive assessment of several EV isolation methods including a novel rapid isolation method EVTRAP for highly efficient capture of extracellular vesicles from human urine sample. We demonstrate that over 95% recovery yield can be consistently achieved by EVTRAP, a significant improvement over current standard techniques. We then applied EVTRAP to identify over 16&#x202f;000 unique peptides representing 2000 unique EV proteins from 200 &#x3bc;L urine sample, including all known EV markers with substantially increased recovery levels over ultracentrifugation. Most importantly, close to 2000 unique phosphopeptides were identified from more than 860 unique phosphoproteins using 10 mL of urine. The data demonstrated that EVTRAP is a highly effective and potentially widely implementable clinical isolation method for analysis of EV protein phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Urine, Evs, Phosphoproteomics, Exosomes, Evtrap

### Affiliations
Tymora Analytical
Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University

### Submitter
Anton Iliuk

### Lab Head
Dr Weiguo Andy Tao
Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University


