### Accession
PXD012002

### Title
Targeting the perivascular niche sensitizes disseminated tumour cells to chemotherapy

### Description
Analysis of bone marrow stroma and MVNs via LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation. Cultures were established for 12 days in EGM-2, washed extensively with PBS to remove medium, collected and pooled into Eppendorf tubes and flash frozen on dry ice prior to storage at -80 ºC until analysis.   Prior to analysis, samples were thawed and homogenized in freshly prepared high-salt buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 3 M NaCl, 25 mM EDTA, 0.25% w/v CHAPS, pH 7.5) containing 1x protease inhibitor (Halt Protease Inhibitor, Thermo Scientific) at a concentration of 10 mg/mL. Homogenization took place in a bead beater (Bullet Blender Storm 24, Next Advance, 1 mm glass beads) for 3 min at 4 ºC. Samples were then spun for 20 min @18,000g at 4 ºC, and the supernatant removed and stored as Fraction 1. A fresh aliquot of high-salt buffer was added to the remaining pellet at 10 mg/mL of the starting weight, vortexed at 4 ºC for 15 min, and spun for 15 min. The supernatant was removed and stored as Fraction 2. This high-salt extraction was repeated once more to generate Fraction 3, after which freshly prepared guanidine extraction buffer (6 M guanidinium chloride adjusted to pH 9.0 with NaOH) was added at 10 mg/mL and vortexed for 1 hour at room temperature. The samples were then spun for 15 min, the supernatant removed, and stored as Fraction 4 (sECM). Fractions 1, 2, & 3 (Cellular) were combined and all fractions were stored at -80 ºC until further analysis.   Hydroxylamine (NH2OH) Digestion. The remaining pellets from each tissue, representing insoluble ECM proteins, were digested with hydroxylamine. Briefly, after chaotrope extraction pellets were treated with freshly prepared hydroxylamine buffer (1 M NH2OH-HCl, 4.5 M guanidine-HCl, 0.2 M K2CO3, pH adjusted to 9.0 with NaOH) at 10 mg/mL of the starting tissue weight. The samples were briefly vortexed, then incubated at 45 ºC with vortexing for 16 hours. Following incubation, the samples were spun for 15 min at 18,000 x g, the supernatant removed, and stored as Fraction 5 (iECM) at -80 ºC until further proteolytic digestion with trypsin. The final pellet was stored at -80 ºC until further analysis.   Trypsin Digestion. For each sample, 200 µL of the Cellular fraction, and 100 µL of the sECM and iECM fractions, respectively, were subsequently subjected to reduction, alkylation, and enzymatic digestion with trypsin. A filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) approach, as well as C18 cleanup, was performed.  LC-MS/MS Analysis. Samples were analyzed on an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nanoLC 1000 system through a nanoelectrospray source. The analytical column (100 μm i.d. × 150 mm fused silica capillary) was packed in house with 2.7 μm 80 Å Cortex C18 resin (Phenomenex; Torrance, CA)). The flow rate was adjusted to 400 nL/min, and peptides were separated over a 120-min linear gradient of 4–28% ACN with 0.1% FA. Data acquisition was performed using the instrument supplied Xcalibur™ (version 2.1) software. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the 300–2000 m/z range with 60,000 resolution. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 1.00E+06 and the fifteen most intense peaks from each full scan were fragmented via HCD with normalized collision energy of 28. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with 15,000 resolution with AGC set at 1.00E+05. All replicates of each tissue were run sequentially and pre-digested yeast alcohol dehydrogenase standard (nanoLCMS Solutions LLC, Rancho Cordova, CA) was run between sample groups to monitor drift in analytical performance.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching and Protein Identification. MS/MS spectra were extracted from raw data files and converted into .mgf files using Pava (UCSF). Peptide spectral matching was performed with Mascot (Ver. 2.5) against the Uniprot mouse database (release 201701).  Mass tolerances were +/- 10 ppm for parent ions, and +/- 0.2 Da for fragment ions. Trypsin specificity was used for cellular and sECM fractions, allowing for 1 missed cleavage. For iECM fraction, C-terminal N and trypsin were used, allowing for 1 missed cleavage. Met oxidation, Pro hydroxylation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and peptide N-terminal pyroglutamic acid formation were set as variable modifications with Cys carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification. Scaffold (version 4.4.6, Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Mascot scoring algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least two identified unique peptides. Metaboanalyst was used for multivariate analysis of proteomic data.

### Publication Abstract
The presence of disseminated tumour cells (DTCs) in bone marrow is predictive of poor metastasis-free survival of patients with breast cancer with localized disease. DTCs persist in distant tissues despite systemic administration of adjuvant chemotherapy. Many assume that this is because the majority of DTCs are quiescent. Here, we challenge this notion and provide evidence that the microenvironment of DTCs protects them from chemotherapy, independent of cell cycle status. We show that chemoresistant DTCs occupy the perivascular niche (PVN) of distant tissues, where they are protected from therapy by vascular endothelium. Inhibiting integrin-mediated interactions between DTCs and the PVN, driven partly by endothelial-derived von Willebrand factor and vascular cell adhesion molecule 1, sensitizes DTCs to chemotherapy. Importantly, chemosensitization is achieved without inducing DTC proliferation or exacerbating chemotherapy-associated toxicities, and ultimately results in prevention of bone metastasis. This suggests that prefacing adjuvant therapy with integrin inhibitors is a viable clinical strategy to eradicate DTCs and prevent metastasis.

### Keywords
Theraputic resistance, Extracellular matrix, Tumour dormancy, Perivascular niche, Ecm

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
University of Colorado

### Submitter
Kirk  Hansen

### Lab Head
Dr Kirk C. Hansen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado


