### Accession
PXD035546

### Title
Identification of novel interaction partners of threonine aspartase1

### Description
The goal of this project was to identify interaction partners of human Taspase 1 using a combination of affinity enrichment and mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution tryptic digestion  After cell lysis proteins were taken up in digestion buffer (6 M Urea, 0.2 % Rapigest SF Surfacatant (Waters) in 100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) containing RapiGest (used as in the manufacturers guidelines). Then samples were incubated with final 5 mM DTT (Dithiothreitol) on a Thermomixer C (Eppendorf; 30 min, room temperature, 1300 rpm). This was followed by an incubation with final 20 mM IAM (Iodoacetamide; 30 min, room temperature, 1300 rpm) in the dark. Excess IAM was then quenched by adding DTT to a final concentration of 25 mM. After reduction and alkylation the digestion was initiated by adding 500 ng LysC (37°C, 3h, 1300 rpm). After 3 hours 500 ng Trypsin was added. The samples were then incubated at 37°C for 16 hours while shaking (1300 rpm). The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 5%. The samples were then incubated for further 45 min at 37°C to cleave the RapiGest detergent. The white precipitate that was visible after 45 min was pelleted (10 min, 13000× g). The supernatant was carefully removed and subsequently desalted on home-made 2 disc C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al. 2007 ). After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 10 µL 0.1 % formic acid solution.  LC-MS/MS.  Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo) (Michalski et al. 2012 ) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 46 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA, 20% water and 80% acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Honeywell). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.6 – 1.0 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 140 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 9% B; gradient 9% to 44% B for 110 min; gradient 44% to 100% B for 20 min and 100% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen et al. 2005 ). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (3.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 60 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 120 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification using MaxQuant.  RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox  et al. 2011) search in MaxQuant (1.6.10.43) using the default settings (Cox  & Mann 2008). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox et al. 2014 ). The MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot H. sapiens reference database (UP000005640_9606.fasta, 74053 entries, downloaded 11/9/2019) and a dedicated database containing the gfp sequence (ACE_0496_GFP.fasta; 1 entry). All searches included a contaminants database search (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 entries). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” with two missed cleavages allowed. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Label-free protein quantification was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. The quantification is based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein. Further analysis and filtering of the results was done in Perseus v1.5.5.3. (Tyanova et al. 2016 ). For quantification we combined related biological replicates to categorical groups and investigated only those proteins that were found in at least one categorical group in a minimum of 3 out of 4 biological replicates. Comparison of protein group quantities (relative quantification) between different MS runs is based solely on the LFQ’s as calculated by MaxQuant, MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al. 2014 ).

### Publication Abstract
The human protease Taspase1 plays a pivotal role in developmental processes and cancerous diseases by processing critical regulators, such as the leukemia proto-oncoprotein MLL. Despite almost two decades of intense research, Taspase1's biology is, however, still poorly understood, and so far its cellular function was not assigned to a superordinate biological pathway or a specific signaling cascade. Our data, gained by methods such as co-immunoprecipitation, LC-MS/MS and Topoisomerase II DNA cleavage assays, now functionally link Taspase1 and hormone-induced, Topoisomerase II&#x3b2;-mediated transient DNA double-strand breaks, leading to active transcription. The specific interaction with Topoisomerase II&#x3b1; enhances the formation of DNA double-strand breaks that are a key prerequisite for stimulus-driven gene transcription. Moreover, Taspase1 alters the H3K4 epigenetic signature upon estrogen-stimulation by cleaving the chromatin-modifying enzyme MLL. As estrogen-driven transcription and MLL-derived epigenetic labelling are reduced upon Taspase1 siRNA-mediated knockdown, we finally characterize Taspase1 as a multifunctional co-activator of estrogen-stimulated transcription.

### Keywords
Interaction partners, Affinity enrichment ms, Threonine aspartase1

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


