### Accession
PXD001617

### Title
Global gene expression profiling through the complete life cycle of Trypanosoma vivax

### Description
The parasitic flagellate Trypanosoma vivax is a cause of animal trypanosomiasis across Africa and South America. The parasite has a digenetic life cycle, passing between mammalian hosts and insect vectors, and a series of developmental forms adapted to each life cycle stage. Transcriptomic and proteomic studies of the related parasites T. brucei and T. congolense have shown how gene expression is regulated during their development. New methods for in vitro culture of the T. vivax insect stages have allowed us to describe global gene expression throughout the complete T. vivax life cycle for the first time. We combined transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of each life stage using RNA-seq and mass spectrometry respectively, to identify genes with patterns of preferential transcription or expression. While T. vivax is similar to related species in several ways, (e.g. developmental regulation of energy metabolism, restricted expression of a dominant variant antigen, and expression of ‘Fam50’ proteins in the insect mouthparts), we identify significant differences in gene expression affecting metabolism in the fly and a suite of T. vivax-specific genes with predicted cell-surface expression that are preferentially expressed in the mammal (‘Fam29, 30’) or the vector (‘Fam34, 35, 43’). Thus, T. vivax differs significantly from other African trypanosomes in the developmentally-regulated proteins it expresses on its cell surface and thus, in the structure of the host-parasite interface. These unique features may yet explain the species differences in life cycle and could, in the shape of bloodstream-stage proteins that do not undergo antigenic variation, provide targets for therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein from cell lysates was dispensed into low protein-binding microcentrifuge tubes (Sarstedt, Leicester, UK) and made up to 160 μl by addition of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The proteins were denatured using 10 μl of 1% (w/v) RapiGestTM (Waters MS Technologies, Manchester, UK) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by three cycles of freeze-thaw, and two cycles of 10 min sonication in water bath. Sample was then incubated at 80 °C for 10 min and reduced with 3 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK) at 60⁰C for 10 minutes then alkylated with 9 mM iodoacetimde (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK) at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteomic grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK) was added at a protein: trypsin ratio of 50:1 and samples incubated at 37⁰C overnight.   LC-MS/MS analysis Peptide mixtures were analyzed by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters MS technologies, Manchester, UK) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer equipped with the manufacturer’s nanospray ion source. The analytical column (nanoACQUITY UPLCTM BEH130 C18 15cm x 75µm, 1.7µm capillary column) was maintained at 35⁰C and a flow-rate of 300nl/min. The gradient consisted of 3-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 90min then a ramp of 40-85% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 3 min. Full scan MS spectra (m/z range 300-2000) were acquired by the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. Analysis was performed in data-dependent mode. The top 20 most intense ions from MS1 scan (full MS) were selected for tandem MS by collision induced dissociation (CID) and all product spectra were acquired in the LTQ ion trap. Ion trap and Orbitrap maximal injection times were set to 50ms and 500ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were imported into Progenesis LC–MS (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics, UK). Runs were time aligned using default settings and using an auto selected run as reference. Peaks were picked by the software and filtered to include only peaks with a charge state of between +2 and +6. Peptide intensities were normalized against the reference run by Progenesis LC-MS and these intensities are used to highlight differences in protein expression between control and treated samples with supporting statistical analysis (ANOVA and q-values) calculated by the Progenesis LC-MS software. Spectral data were transformed to mgf files with Progenesis LC-MS and exported for peptide identification using the Mascot (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) search engine. Tandem MS data were searched against a custom database that contained the common contamination and TriTrypDB-6.0_TvivaxY486_AnnotatedProteins. Search parameters were as follows; precursor mass tolerance set to 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da. One missed tryptic cleavage was permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) set as a variable modification. Mascot search results were further processed using the machine learning algorithm Percolator. The false discovery rates were set at 1% and at least two unique peptides were required for reporting protein identifications. Protein abundance (iBAQ) was calculated as the sum of all the peak intensities (from Progenesis output) divided by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides [33]. Protein abundance was normalized by dividing the protein iBAQ value by the summed iBAQ values for that sample. The reported abundance is the mean of the biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
The parasitic flagellate Trypanosoma vivax is a cause of animal trypanosomiasis across Africa and South America. The parasite has a digenetic life cycle, passing between mammalian hosts and insect vectors, and a series of developmental forms adapted to each life cycle stage. Each point in the life cycle presents radically different challenges to parasite metabolism and physiology and distinct host interactions requiring remodeling of the parasite cell surface. Transcriptomic and proteomic studies of the related parasites T. brucei and T. congolense have shown how gene expression is regulated during their development. New methods for in vitro culture of the T. vivax insect stages have allowed us to describe global gene expression throughout the complete T. vivax life cycle for the first time. We combined transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of each life stage using RNA-seq and mass spectrometry respectively, to identify genes with patterns of preferential transcription or expression. While T. vivax conforms to a pattern of highly conserved gene expression found in other African trypanosomes, (e.g. developmental regulation of energy metabolism, restricted expression of a dominant variant antigen, and expression of 'Fam50' proteins in the insect mouthparts), we identified significant differences in gene expression affecting metabolism in the fly and a suite of T. vivax-specific genes with predicted cell-surface expression that are preferentially expressed in the mammal ('Fam29, 30, 42') or the vector ('Fam34, 35, 43'). T. vivax differs significantly from other African trypanosomes in the developmentally-regulated proteins likely to be expressed on its cell surface and thus, in the structure of the host-parasite interface. These unique features may yet explain the species differences in life cycle and could, in the form of bloodstream-stage proteins that do not undergo antigenic variation, provide targets for therapy.

### Keywords
Complete life cycle, Trypanosoma vivax

### Affiliations
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Dong Xia

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Wastling
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool


