### Accession
PXD029249

### Title
Characterization of AR interactome in prostate cancer cells after MC3324 treatment

### Description
We here investigated the alterations in the androgen receptor (AR) itneractome after treatment with the dual-KDM inhibitor MC3324.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture LNCaP, C4-2 and C4-2B were purchased from ATCC (Milan, Italy). 22RV1, DU145, and PC3 cells lines were kindly provided by Prof. Carmen Jeronimo (Institute of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS) University of Porto. Cells were grown in Roswell Park Memorial Institute culture medium (RPMI; EuroClone, Milan, Italy), supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS; Sigma-Aldrich), antimicrobials (100 U/mL penicillin, 100 µg/mL streptomycin, 250 ng/mL amphotericin-B), 2 mM L-glutamine (EuroClone), and 1% essential amino acids solution (MEM; EuroClone). All cell lines were cultivated at 37°C with 5% CO2 and were checked for mycoplasma contamination using EZ-PCR Mycoplasma Test Kit (Biological Industries; 20-700-20).  Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP)  After induction of MC3324 for 6 h in LNCaP, C4-2, and C4-2B cells, Co-IP of endogenously expressed AR protein was performed using whole cell lysate (800 µg) in Co-IP buffer (10 mM TRIS pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10 mM sodium molybdate, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1X Roche protease inhibitor cocktail). Cell lysis was obtained with sonication (Bioruptor; Diagenode). Protein A/G Plus Agarose (Santa Cruz; sc-2003) was coated with appropriate AR antibody and mixed gently for 2 h at 4°C for immunoprecipitation. A fraction of the resulting complexes (in triplicate) was washed three times with Wash Buffer 1 (10 mM TRIS pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10 mM sodium molybdate, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1X Roche protease inhibitor cocktail), and three times with Wash Buffer 2 (10 mM TRIS pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10 mM sodium molybdate, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1X Roche protease inhibitor cocktail), then denatured and eluted in 2X bromophenol blue as control for IP. The remaining IP complexes were digested with trypsin and eluted in column and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Partially digested proteins are then eluted with two times 50 ll 2 M urea, 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 5 mM chloroacetamide and fully digested overnight at room temperature. DTT and chloroacetamide are present for the reduction and alkylation of disulfide bonds. Digestion is stopped the next day by adding 1% TFA and peptides are purified on C18 StageTips Briefly, three C18 disks were stacked on top of each other and transferred to a pipette tip. Tips were conditioned with methanol and 80% acetonitrile–0.5% acetic acid in LCMS-grade H2O (Buffer B), and equilibrated with 0.5% acetic acid in LCMS-grade H2O (Buffer A). Samples were loaded and washed with Buffer A, then eluted with Buffer B. Peptides were then dried and kept at -80°C until use. Any remaining detergents from the IP protocol were removed by SP3 protocol [5]. Briefly, dry peptides from the C18 clean-up were incubated with 2 uL of a 50:50 mixture of SeraMag-A and SeraMag-B (Sigma-Aldrich) beads and 200 uL acetonitrile. Beads were then washed once more with pure acetonitrile and eluted by incubation with 2% DMSO in LCMS-grade H2O. Peptides were then dried and re-suspended in a solution containing 0.1% formic acid in LCMS-grade H2O.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis For AR IP and whole fractionated proteome samples, a volume corresponding to 1 ug of digested peptides was analyzed. Digested peptide mixtures were injected into a reverse phase EasySpray (Thermo Fisher Scientific) analytical column (ID 75 µm×50 cm C18 2 µm 100 Å particle size). Gradient was run using LCMS-grade water with 0.1% (FA (solvent A) and 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% FA (solvent B) for 120 min. Gradient was run as follows over a 350 uL/min flow-rate: 90 min 10–30% solvent B, 20 mins 30–45% solvent B, 1 min 45–95% solvent B, and 9.5 mins 95% solvent B. Eluting peptides were subjected to a 1.8 kV spray voltage. Full scans were acquired at 60,000 resolution and the 15 most intense ions were fragmented using high-energy induced collision dissociation, whose spectra were collected at 15,00 resolution. Precursor ions with charge 1 and >6 and with intensities lower than 1.7E4 were excluded from triggering fragmentation. Ion accumulation time was set to 60 msec. Automatic gain control was set to 1E5. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 sec. Thermo RAW files were acquired using Xcalibur software (version 4.1).  Analysis of mass spectrometry data MS analysis-derived RAW files were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0) and MS spectra searched using the Andromeda search engine. The Uniprot-Swissprot human proteome database (version download: 2020.02.24) was used for database search. Selected protease was trypsin. Carbamidomethylation of Cys residues was selected as fixed modification. Met oxidation and acetylation of N-terminal residues were selected as variable modifications. The Label-free Quantification (LFQ) option was selected. Identification of peptides resulting from missed cleavages was allowed. Precursor ion tolerance was 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches, respectively. Match-between-run option was enabled, and settings left to default. MaxQuant search-derived protein intensities were used for statistical analyses. Protein tables were filtered for protein q-value (<0.01), contaminant (excluded), reverse sequences (excluded), and unique peptides (at least 1).  Statistical analysis AR IP and proteome tables were filtered for missing data (cutoff: 30%), and log2 transformed. Pseudocount (value: 0.1) was applied to the protein table prior to log2 transformation).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interactome, Androgen receptor, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Università degli Studi della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli
Lund University

### Submitter
Tommaso De Marchi

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia Altucci
Università degli Studi della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli


