### Accession
PXD047619

### Title
From the fat body to the hemolymph: Profiling tick immune and storage proteins through transcriptomics and proteomics

### Description
Ticks are blood-feeding arachnids that are known to transmit various pathogenic microorganisms to their hosts. During blood feeding, ticks activate their metabolism and immune system to efficiently utilise nutrients from the host's blood and complete the feeding process. In contrast to insects, in which the fat body is known to be a central organ that controls essential metabolic processes and immune defence mechanisms, the function of the fat body in tick physiology is still relatively unexplored. To fill this gap, we sought to uncover the repertoire of genes expressed in the fat body associated with trachea (FB/Tr) by analyzing the transcriptome of individual, partially fed (previtellogenic) Ixodes ricinus females . The resulting catalog of individual mRNA sequences reveals a broad repertoire of transcripts encoding proteins involved in nutrient storage and distribution, as well as components of the tick immune system. To gain a detailed insight into the secretory products of FB/Tr specifically involved in inter-tissue transport and humoral immunity, the transcriptomic data were complemented with the proteome of soluble proteins in the hemolymph of partially fed female ticks. Among these proteins, the hemolipoglyco-carrier proteins were predominant. When comparing immune peptides and proteins from the fat body with those produced by hemocytes, we found that the fat body serves as a unique producer of certain immune components. Finally, time-resolved transcriptional regulation of selected immune transcripts from the FB/Tr was examined in response to experimental challenges with model microbes and analysed by RT-qPCR. Overall, our data show that the fat body of ticks, similar to insects, is an important metabolic tissue that also plays a remarkable role in immune defense against invading microbes. These findings improve our understanding of tick biology and its impact on the transmission of tick-borne pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Adult I. ricinus were collected near České Budějovice, the Czech Republic. Females were fed on guinea pigs for 5 days. Hemolymph was collected from the cut leg (10 females per group, 3 groups in total) under a stereomicroscope into 40 μL of chilled sterile PBS. Plasma and hemocytes were separated by centrifugation at 1800 rpm for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant (plasma diluted in PBS) was transferred to a clean tube and again spun down at 2500 rpm for 5 min. Pellets (hemocytes) and supernatants (plasma) were stored at -80°C until further use for proteomic analysis. Hemocyte pellets were homogenized in 200 μL of 50 mM Na-phosphate buffer, pH 7.5, supplemented with 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, and Halt™ protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 78439) and processed as previously described (Kozelková et al., 2023, Molecular & Cellular Proteomics). Ten micrograms of plasma or hemocyte homogenate proteins were digested in solution with trypsin, purified with Stage tips solid-phase C18 disc (Empore), and subjected to NanoLS ESI/MS/ MS analysis performed on an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) as described (Kozelková et al., 2023, Molecular & Cellular Proteomics).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.14) with the integrated search engine Andromeda (Cox and Mann, 2008), using the I. ricinus database available in Uniprot (08. 06. 2021) and the contaminant database included in MaxQuant software for protein identification. Data analysis parameters and algorithms for Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were applied as described (Kozelková et al., 2023, Molecular & Cellular Proteomics). Contaminants, proteins identified by only one peptide with a score of less than 40, and proteins present in only one of three replicate samples were excluded from further analysis. LFQ intensity values were transformed with log2. Two-sample t-tests, principal component analysis, and hierarchical clustering were performed using algorithms integrated in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Ticks are blood-feeding arachnids that are known to transmit various pathogenic microorganisms to their hosts. During blood feeding, ticks activate their metabolism and immune system to efficiently utilise nutrients from the host's blood and complete the feeding process. In contrast to insects, in which the fat body is known to be a central organ that controls essential metabolic processes and immune defense mechanisms, the function of the fat body in tick physiology is still relatively unexplored. To fill this gap, we sought to uncover the repertoire of genes expressed in the fat body associated with trachea (FB/Tr) by analyzing the transcriptome of individual, partially fed (previtellogenic) Ixodes ricinus females. The resulting catalog of individual mRNA sequences reveals a broad repertoire of transcripts encoding proteins involved in nutrient storage and distribution, as well as components of the tick immune system. To gain a detailed insight into the secretory products of FB/Tr specifically involved in inter-tissue transport and humoral immunity, the transcriptomic data were complemented with the proteome of soluble proteins in the hemolymph of partially fed female ticks. Among these proteins, the hemolipoglyco-carrier proteins were predominant. When comparing immune peptides and proteins from the fat body with those produced by hemocytes, we found that the fat body serves as a unique producer of certain immune components. Finally, time-resolved transcriptional regulation of selected immune transcripts from the FB/Tr was examined in response to experimental challenges with model microbes and analyzed by RT-qPCR. Overall, our data show that the fat body of ticks, similar to insects, is an important metabolic tissue that also plays a remarkable role in immune defense against invading microbes. These findings improve our understanding of tick biology and its impact on the transmission of tick-borne pathogens.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Proteomics, Hemolymph, Tick, Ixodes ricinus, Fat body

### Affiliations
University of South Bohemia in Ceske Budejovice
Faculty of Science
Branisovska 1760
Ceske Budejovice
Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Branisovska 1160/31, 37005 Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Filip Dyčka

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Kopáček
Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Branisovska 1160/31, 37005 Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic


### SDRF
- organism: ixodes ricinus
- organism part: hemocyte, plasma
- disease: not available
- cell type: not available
- label: label free sample
- instrument: timsTOF Pro
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Acetyl

