### Accession
PXD026712

### Title
A novel method of spontaneously-released extracellular vesicle isolation from brain

### Description
Extracellular Vesicles (EVs) exhibit great potential in for brain  disease diagnositics and treatment, representing a valuable tool in the new era of pPrecision medicine which demands high-quality human biospecimens. However, current brain exosome EV isolation approaches rely on its tissue dissociation, which may can contaminate the exosome EV fractions with immature intralumenalcellular vesicles that wcould otherwise be targeted for endolysosomal degradation. Hereby, we present an efficient exosome purification method that captures a more physiologically relevant EV population exosome-enriched extracellular vesicles (EVs) spontaneously released by mouse and human brain tissue, representing a more physiologically relevant exosome EV population.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation-protein digestion: EV samples were lysed, reduced with DTT, and alkylated with Iodoacetamide. The protein extracts were then subjected to tryptic (Trypsin Gold, Promega) digestion according to the Sp3 protocol15.     Nanoflow-MS/MS Analysis: Each sample was dried down by vacuum centrifugation, reconstituted in loading buffer (2% Acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid in water), and sonicated for 3 min. The samples were analyzed using an Ultimate-3000 RSLC coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. Samples of 10 μl of peptides were pre-concentrated at a flow of 5 μl/min for 10 min using a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50 cm C18 column (75μm ID, particle size 2μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) contained solution A (2% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and solution B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). The peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 4% - 40% B in 330 min at a 300 nl/min flow rate. The column was placed in an oven operating at 35 °C. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 300–1600) in profile mode and data-dependent acquisition with the resolution set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 106. The six most intense ions were sequentially isolated for collision-induced MS/MS fragmentation (normalized CID of 35%) and detection in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 sec. Ions with single charge states were excluded. Lockmass of m/z 445,120025 was used for internal calibration. The software Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed, using the MaxQuant software suite, against the uniprot mouse database supplemented with a common contaminant database. The protein quantification was performed by label-free quantification (LFQ) using the matching between run feature activated. The search was conducted under strict FDR settings of 1% for both protein and peptides (minimum peptide length 7 aa). Missed tryptic cleavages was set to 2. The carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification for all groups. Variable modifications assessed were oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and deamidation of glutamine and asparagines residues. The search for second peptide feature was activated, as was the matching between run (MBR).   The LFQ values generated in MaxQuant were analyzed in Perseus (version 1.6.10.43). Potential contaminants, decoy proteins and proteins only identified by site were filtered out. Finally, we used ConsensusPathDB to detect significant cellular component GO categories for the abundant proteins found previously. We used the proteins identified at 5% protein-level identification FDR as the background set and thresholded the significant terms at a 5% Benjamin–Hochberg corrected FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Mouse, Extracellular vesicles, Spontaneous release, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), Medical School, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Ioannis Sotiropoulos
Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), Medical School, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal


