### Accession
PXD042620

### Title
Identification of host PDZ-based interactions with SARS-CoV-2 E protein in human monocytes

### Description
PDZ (Post-synaptic density, PSD-95)/ Disc large, Dlg/ Zonula occludens, ZO-1) proteins are central in the assembly of multiprotein signalling complexes that are formed in distinctive, specialized cell regions. In these complexes different signals are orchestrated and traduced into quick and efficient responses controlling cell polarization and cell communication. Viral pathogens target host PDZ proteins by expressing viral proteins containing a PDZ binding motif (PBM). SARS-CoV-1 and -2 harbour the protein E, a viroporin with a conserved PBM in its carboxyl-terminal region. SARS-CoV-1 E protein is a pathogenicity factor that in epithelia interacts with the PDZ protein PALS1, which promote disruption of cell junctions. SARS-CoV-2 infects epithelia, but also cells from the innate immune response, including monocytes, dendritic cells, and alveolar macrophages. Identification of targets of SARS-CoV-2 E protein in immune cells might offer valuable clues to understand how SARS-CoV-2 alters immune response.  Here we generated a SARS-CoV-2 E protein fused to a GFP-tag at the amino terminal. This recombinant protein was used as bait to identify associated proteins in THP-1 cells, a human monocytic cell line that can be differentiated to macrophages and dendritic cells.  Analysis of the GFP-E protein interactome provided 372 proteins that fall into different functional groups. Only eight of these proteins harbor PDZ domains, including the cell polarity protein ZO-2 and the chemoattractant IL-16.  Syntenin, a PDZ protein previously identified as interactor of SARS-CoV-1 E protein in epithelia, was also found in our analysis. Little is known about these PDZ proteins in immune cells, so we addressed their expression in monocytes and along the differentiation towards macrophages and dendritic cells. Our findings support the notion that viral targeting of PDZ proteins alters inflammatory response and highlight the importance of identifying the functions of PDZ proteins into maintenance of immune fitness.

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM Digestion Protein concentration was estimated by Pierce 660nm protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein digestion in the S-Trap filter (Protifi, Huntington, NY, USA) was performed following the protocol described in [1] with slight modifications. Briefly, each sample was diluted to 40 µL with 5% SDS. Samples were reduced and alkylated by adding 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 minutes at 60ºC. Afterwards, 12% phosphoric acid and then seven volumes of binding buffer (90% methanol; 100 mM TEAB) were added to the sample (final phosphoric acid concentration: 1.2%). After mixing, the protein solution was loaded to an S-Trap filter in two consecutive steps, separated by a 2 min centrifugation at 3000 x g. Then the filter was washed 3 times with 150 μL of binding buffer. Finally, samples were digested at 37°C with Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:20 (w/w) in 20 μL of a 100 mM TEAB solution. Samples were spun through the S-Trap prior to digestion. Flow-through was then reloaded to the top of the S-Trap column and allowed to digest in a wet chamber at 37°C overnight. To elute peptides, two step-wise buffers were applied (1) 40 μL of 25 mM TEAB and 2) 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid in H2O), separated by a 2 min centrifugation at 3000 x g in each case. Eluted peptides were pooled and vacuum centrifuged to dryness.  Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis (LC-ESI-MS/MS) Digested samples were cleaned-up/desalted using Stage-Tips with Empore 3M C18 disks (Sigma-Aldrich) [1]. After desalting, peptide concentration was carried out by Qubit™ Fluorometric Quantitation (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 500 ng aliquot of each digested sample was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MS/MS (Liquid Chromatography Electrospray Ionization Tandem Mass Spectrometric) analysis using an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a Orbitrap Exploris 240 equipped with FAIMS  Pro ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted onto a 50 cm × 75 μm Easy‐spray PepMap C18 analytical column at 45°C and were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a 60 min gradient ranging from 2 % to 95 % mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid (FA); mobile phase B: 100 % acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1 % FA). The loading solvent was 2 % ACN) in 0.1 % FA and injection volume was 5 µl.  Data acquisition was performed using a data-dependent top-20 method, in full scan positive mode, scanning 350 to 1200 m/z. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, with Normalized Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target (%) of 300 and a maximum injection time (IT) of 40 ms. The top 20 most intense ions from each MS1 scan were selected and fragmented via Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 45,000 at m/z 200, with AGC target of 200 and maximum ion injection time of 120 ms. Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 1 m/z, exclusion duration (s) of 45 and the HCD collision energy was 32. Precursor ions with single, unassigned, or six and higher charge states from fragmentation selection were excluded.  [1] Ciordia S, Alvarez-Sola G, Rullán M, Urman JM, Ávila MA, Corrales FJ. Digging deeper into bile proteome. J Proteomics. 2021 Jan 6;230:103984. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103984.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis and sequence search Raw instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.5.0.400 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS2 spectra were searched using Mascot Server v2.8.0 (Matrix Science, London, UK) and a target/decoy database built from sequences in the Homo sapiens and SARS-CoV-2 proteomes at Uniprot Knowledgebase (20210225). All searches were configured with dynamic modifications for pyrrolidone from Q (-17.027 Da) and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and static modification as carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteine, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). The peptide precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.02 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins, peptides, and peptide spectral matches (PSMs) peptides were kept at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins containing PDZ (post-synaptic density, PSD-95/disc large, Dlg/zonula occludens, ZO-1) domains assemble signaling complexes that orchestrate cell responses. Viral pathogens target host PDZ proteins by coding proteins containing a PDZ-binding motif (PBM). The presence of a PBM in the SARS-CoV-2 E protein contributes to the virus's pathogenicity. SARS-CoV-2 infects epithelia, but also cells from the innate immune response, including monocytes and alveolar macrophages. This process is critical for alterations of the immune response that are related to the deaths caused by SARS-CoV-2. Identification of E-protein targets in immune cells might offer clues to understanding how SARS-CoV-2 alters the immune response. We analyzed the interactome of the SARS-CoV-2 E protein in human monocytes. The E protein was expressed fused to a GFP tag at the amino terminal in THP-1 monocytes, and associated proteins were identified using a proteomic approach. The E-protein interactome provided 372 partners; only 8 of these harbored PDZ domains, including the cell polarity protein ZO-2, the chemoattractant IL-16, and syntenin. We addressed the expression and localization of the identified PDZ proteins along the differentiation of primary and THP-1 monocytes towards macrophages and dendritic cells. Our data highlight the importance of identifying the functions of PDZ proteins in the maintenance of immune fitness and the viral alteration of inflammatory response.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Syntenin, Zo-2, Envelope e protein, Coronavirus, Monocyte, Pdz, Viral targeting, Il-16, Innate immune response, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology
Centro Nacional de Biotecnología CNB/CSIC

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Isabel Mérida
Centro Nacional de Biotecnología CNB/CSIC


