### Accession
PXD008543

### Title
Comparison of brain and hippocampal majority proteomes from MAP6 KO mice submitted or not to electroconvulsive stimulations

### Description
For major depression, the non-drug therapy Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) treatment is highly effective and fast-acting. Despite a large and long-standing clinical use, the neurobiological mechanisms underlining ECT curative action are still poorly understood. Thanks to a genetic animal model that constitutively exhibit behavioural and biological features relevant to some aspects of major depressive disorder, here we analyse the behavioural and biological consequences of electroconvulsive stimulations (ECS), the animal model of ECT.  We found that a classical ECS treatment, with 10 stimulation over 2 weeks period, has a beneficial effect on constitutive behavioural defects. We therefore compared brain and hippocampal majority proteomes from MAP6 KO mice submitted or not to electroconvulsive stimulations.

### Sample Protocol
Total brain or hippocampus from mice submitted or not to ECS (10 ECS sessions across a 12 days period (D1-5 and D8-12) delivered with an Ugo Basile generator (model 57800) ; Stimulation parameters (frequency 120Hz, pulse width 0.5 ms, total shock duration 2 ms, current 20mA) were set on the basis of a preliminary study in order to trigger seizures lasting more than 10s) were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM MgCl2, 1% NP40, 0.5% Na Deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS). 3 volumes of protein sample were mixed with 1 volume of Laemmli 4X buffer and heated 5 min at 95°C. Proteins were stacked in the top of a NuPAGE gel in a stacking band (Life Technologies) before in-gel digestion with tryspin, as described in (Milbradt et al., 2014) Resulting peptides were analysed by nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (UltiMate 3000 coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using SwissProt database (Mus musculus taxonomy, December 2017 version) and the frequently observed contaminant database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. Statistical analyses were then conducted using ProStaR (Wieczorek et al., Bioinformatics, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Ecs, Nanolc-ms/ms, Mouse model, Psychiatric disorders

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


