### Accession
PXD009252

### Title
A mass spectrometry-based predictive strategy reveals ADAP1 is phosphorylated at Tyrosine 364.

### Description
Abstract Rationale The goal of this work was to identify phosphorylation sites within the amino acid sequence of human ADAP1. Using traditional mass spectrometry-based techniques we were unable to produce interpretable spectra demonstrating modification by phosphorylation. This prompted us to employ a strategy in which phosphorylated peptides were first predicted using peptide mapping followed by targeted MS/MS acquisition. Methods ADAP1 was immunoprecipitated from extracts of HEK293 cells stably-transfected with ADAP1 cDNA. Immunoprecipitated ADAP1 was digested with proteolytic enzymes and analyzed by LC-MS in MS1 mode by high-resolution quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (QTOF-MS). Peptide molecular features were extracted using an untargeted data mining algorithm. Extracted peptide neutral masses were matched against the ADAP1 amino acid sequence with phosphorylation included as a predicted modification. Peptides with predicted phosphorylation sites were analyzed by targeted LC-MS2. Acquired MS2 spectra were then analyzed using database search engines to confirm phosphorylation. Spectra of phosphorylated peptides were validated by manual interpretation. Further confirmation was performed by manipulating phospho-peptide abundance using calf intestinal phosphatase (CIP) and the phorbol ester, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). Results Of five predicted phosphopeptides, one, comprised of the sequence AVDRPMLPQEYAVEAHFK, was confirmed to be phosphorylated on a Tyrosine at position 364. Pre-treatment of cells with PMA prior to immunoprecipitation increased the ratio of phosphorylated to unphosphorylated peptide as determined by area counts of extracted ion chromatograms (EIC). Addition of CIP to immunoprecipitation reactions eliminated the phosphorylated form.  Conclusions A novel phosphorylation site was identified at Tyrosine 364. Phosphorylation at this site is increased by treatment with PMA. PMA promotes membrane translocation and activation of protein kinase C (PKC), indicating that Tyrosine 364 is phosphorylated by a PKC-dependent mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
The ADAP1 protein was overexpressed in HEK293 cells and enriched using immunoprecipitation. Immunoprecipitated ADAP1 was digested with trypsin and analyzed by LCMS in both MS1 and MS2 acquisition modes.

### Data Protocol
Peptide molecular features were extracted using the Find by Molecular Feature algorithm in Mass Hunter software (Agilent Technologies). The following extraction parameters were used: minimum ion peak height = 1000 counts, ion count threshold = 2 or more ions, allowed ion species = +H and +Na, charge state maximum = 4, chromatographic peak height 3,000 counts, and isotope model = peptide. Peptide sequence matching was performed in BioConfirm software (Agilent Technologies).  Extracted peptide neutral masses were matched against in silico digested ADAP1 amino acid sequence with phosphorylation included as a predicted modification. A match mass error of 10 ppm was allowed. For all matched peptides, m/z and retention time for all detected charge states were exported in a targeted MS/MS inclusion list for targeted MS/MS data acquisition. Database searching. Raw data were extracted and analyzed using Spectrum Mill (Rev A.03.03.038 SR1, Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA). Peak picking was performed within Spectrum Mill using the following parameters: signal-to-noise = 25:1, maximum charge state = 5, and precursors MH+ = 600-6000 Da. For searches the following parameters were applied: Swiss-Prot Human database (release 15.12), carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, phosphorylation and oxidized methionine as variable modifications, maximum of 1 missed cleavage, precursor mass tolerance +/- 20 ppm, product mass tolerance +/- 40 ppm, sequence tag length > 3, and maximum ambiguous precursor charge = 3. Data were also searched against an in-house database that consisted of the ADAP1 sequence. Data were evaluated and protein identifications were considered significant if the following confidence thresholds were met: minimum of 2 peptides per protein, protein score >20, individual peptide scores > 10, and Scored Percent Intensity (SPI) >70%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Adap1

### Affiliations
University of Colorado, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences

### Submitter
Rick Reisdorph

### Lab Head
Dr Richard M. Reisdorph
University of Colorado, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences


