### Accession
PXD022909

### Title
TLR9-activated B cells imprint adoptively transferred CD8+ T cells with potent tumor immunity and persistence

### Description
Here we report a new way to reverse the tolerant state of adoptively transferred CD8+ T cells against melanoma through ex vivo expansion with the TLR9 agonist CpG. CpG-generated T cells elicited potent immunity without co-administration of high dose IL-2 or vaccination, which are adjuvants classically required to effectively treat solid tumors. CpG-expanded T cells exhibited an IL-2RhighICOShighCD39low phenotype ex vivo and engrafted robustly in vivo. In culture, B cells were the only cell type essential for imprinting T cells with this phenotype and potent tumor immunity. CpG agonists targeting B cells, but not dendritic cells, generated CD8+ T cell products with remarkable antitumor properties. Purified B cells were sufficient to mediate the CpG-associated changes in T cells. These findings reveal a vital role for B cells in the generation of effective antitumor T cells and have immediate implications for profoundly improving immunotherapy for patients.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 9M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8, and 100 units/mL Pierce Universal Nuclease (ThermoScientific cat. # 88700) and the concentration of protein was measured using a BCA assay (ThermoScientific cat. # 23225).  Protein was LysC and trypsin (Sigma cat. # T6567) digested at 37C for 18 hours, and the resulting peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips. Peptides from one-third of each Stage Tip elution were separated and analyzed on an EASY nLC 1200 System in-line with the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific).  Peptides were pressure loaded at 1,180 bar, and separated on a C18 reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 µm x 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å)) using a gradient of 5% to 35% solvent B in 120 min (Solvent A: 2% ACN/0.1% FA; Solvent B: 80% ACN/ 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The column was thermostated at 45 C.    Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode with a high resolution (60,000) FTMS survey scan, mass range of m/z 375-1575, followed by tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) of the most intense precursors with a cycle time of 3 s.  The automatic gain control target value was set to “standard” for the survey MS scan.  Fragmentation was performed with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and HCD collision energy of 35%; the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a 15,000 resolution.  Monoisotopic-precursor selection was set to “peptide”.  Apex detection was not enabled.  Precursors were dynamically excluded from resequencing for 15 sec and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm.    Advanced peak determination was not enabled.  Precursor ions with charge states that were undetermined, 1, or > 7 were excluded from further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were extracted from raw LC-MS/MS data using the MaxQuant platform v.1.6.3.3 with the Andromeda database searching algorithm and label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 2008 Dec;26(12):1367-72;    Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Sep;13(9):2513-26;    Tyanova S, Temu T, Cox J. The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nat Protoc. 2016 Dec;11(12):2301-2319).  Data were searched against a mouse Uniprot reference database UP000000589 with 54,425 proteins (04/18/19) and a database of common contaminants.  The false discovery rate, determined using a reversed database strategy, was set at <1% at the protein and peptide level.  Fully tryptic peptides with a minimum of 7 residues were required including cleavage between lysine and proline.  Two missed cleavages were permitted.  LC-MS/MS analyses were performed in triplicate for each biological replicate with match between runs enabled. The fast LFQ and stabilize large ratios features were enabled.  The first search was performed with a 25 ppm mass tolerance, after recalibration a 4.5 ppm tolerance was used for the main search.  A minimum ratio count of 2 was required for protein quantification with at least one unique peptide. Parameters included static modification of cysteine with carbamidomethyl and variable N-terminal acetylation.    The protein groups text file from MaxQuant was processed in Perseus v. 1.6.7.0 (Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. 2016 Sep;13(9):731-40).  Identified proteins were filtered to remove proteins only identified by a modified peptide, matches to the reversed database, and potential contaminants.  The mean, normalized LFQ intensities for each biological replicate were log2 transformed.  Quantitative measurements were required in a minimum of three biological replicates in at least one treatment group.    To identify significantly regulated proteins ANOVA was performed with a permutation-based FDR cutoff of 0.05

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T cells adoptive cell transfer therapy toll-like receptors melanoma b cells

### Affiliations
Medical University of South Carolina College of Medicine Department of Microbiology and Immunology   Acting Associate Professor, Department of Surgery, Department of Microbiology and Immunology Emory University School of Medicine Director Translational Research for Cutaneous Malignancies Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University
Medical University of SC

### Submitter
Jennifer Bethard

### Lab Head
Dr Chrystal Paulos PhD
Medical University of South Carolina College of Medicine Department of Microbiology and Immunology   Acting Associate Professor, Department of Surgery, Department of Microbiology and Immunology Emory University School of Medicine Director Translational Research for Cutaneous Malignancies Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University


### SDRF
- Labels0: nan
- Label free norm param: nan

