### Accession
PXD015752

### Title
Arg-GlcNAcylation of GshB, An intra-bacterial activity for a T3SS effector

### Description
Many Gram-negative bacterial pathogens interact with mammalian cells by using type III secretion systems (T3SS) to inject virulence proteins directly into infected host cells. A subset of these injected protein ‘effectors’ are enzymes that modify the structure and inhibit the function of human proteins by catalyzing the addition of unusual post-translational modifications. T3SS effectors play essential roles in bacterial virulence and their modes of action have provided great insight into the functions and the components of the innate immune system. The E. coli and Citrobacter rodentium NleB effectors, as well as the Salmonella enterica SseK effectors are glycosyltransferases that modify host protein substrates with N-acetyl glucosamine (GlcNAc) on arginine residues. Arginine glycosylation is unusual because it occurs on the guanidinium groups of arginines, which are poor nucleophiles. This post-translational modification disrupts the normal functioning of host immune response proteins. T3SS effectors are chaperoned in the bacterium to keep the effectors partially unfolded and competent for secretion, as well as for targeting the effectors to the T3SS sorting platform. The chaperones are then stripped from their effector substrates at the sorting platform and the effectors are secreted in an unfolded conformation. T3SS effectors are thought to be inactive within the bacterium and fold into their active conformations after they are injected into host cells. While performing mass spectrometry experiments to identify glycosylation substrates of NleB orthologs, we unexpectedly observed that the E. coli glutathione synthetase (GshB) is glycosylated on an arginine residue (R256) by NleB. NleB glycosyltransferase activity is essential to C. rodentium survival in oxidative stress conditions because glycosylation of GshB results in enhanced glutathione production. These data represent, to our knowledge, the first intra-bacterial activity for a T3SS effector and show that effector activities thought to be restricted to host cell compartments additionally play important roles in regulating bacterial physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial lysates were lysised in lysis buffer with  boiling and preciated overnight with ice-cold acetone. Samples were reduction and alykation with TCEP and CAA then Digested with Trypsin. Samples were cleaned up with tC18 Seppak columns and dried. Arg-glycosylated glycopeptide were affinity purified and then subjected to MS analsysis. For in vitro or in vivo assessment of gshB glycosylation purified gshB were subjected to in solution tryspin digestions.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant based identificiation and LFQ based quantification of Arginine-glycopeptides was uused.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ehec, Effectors, Epec, Glycosylation, Citrobacter rodentium, Nleb

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, United States
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Philip R. Hardwidge
College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, United States


