### Accession
PXD025329

### Title
Monobromobimane labelling in early- and late-passage primary human mesemchymal stem cells subjected to 2 hour heat shock

### Description
Monobromobimane (mBBr) labelling: mBBr labelling was carried out either immediately prior to 42°C, two hour heat shock, or immediately following heat shock. Medium was removed from culture flasks and cells were washed using PBS. Cells were then labelled by incubation at 37°C with 6 mL of 400 µM mBBr (Sigma-Aldrich, #B4380) for 10 minutes. Following labeling, 6 ml of 2 mM L-glutathione reduced (GSH, SigmaAldrich, #G4251) in PBS was added to quench the mBBr reaction. The quenched mBBr solution was removed and cells were washed with PBS.   Mass spectrometry (MS) sample preparation, analysis and data processing: Six 1.6 mm steel beads (Next Advance Inc.) were added to the cell pellet tube with 30 µL SL-DOC (1.1% (w/w) sodium dodecyl sulfate (Sigma), 0.3% (w/w) sodium deoxycholate (Sigma), 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB, Fluka), in de-ionised (DI) water containing 0.1% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), and 0.1% (v/v) phosphotase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Cells were homogen

### Sample Protocol
Monobromobimane (mBBr) labelling: mBBr labelling was carried out either immediately prior to 42°C, two hour heat shock, or immediately following heat shock. Medium was removed from culture flasks and cells were washed using PBS. Cells were then labelled by incubation at 37°C with 6 mL of 400 µM mBBr (Sigma-Aldrich, #B4380) for 10 minutes. Following labeling, 6 ml of 2 mM L-glutathione reduced (GSH, SigmaAldrich, #G4251) in PBS was added to quench the mBBr reaction. The quenched mBBr solution was removed and cells were washed with PBS.   Mass spectrometry (MS) sample preparation, analysis and data processing: Six 1.6 mm steel beads (Next Advance Inc.) were added to the cell pellet tube with 30 µL SL-DOC (1.1% (w/w) sodium dodecyl sulfate (Sigma), 0.3% (w/w) sodium deoxycholate (Sigma), 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB, Fluka), in de-ionised (DI) water containing 0.1% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), and 0.1% (v/v) phosphotase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Cells were homogenized in a Bullet Blender (Next Advance Inc.) at maximum speed for 2 min. Resulting homogenates were cleared by centrifugation (12 °C, 10k rpm, 5 min). Immobilized-trypsin beads (Perfinity Biosciences) were suspended in 150 µL of digest buffer (1.33 mM CaCl2, Sigma, in AB) and 50 µL of protein lysate and shaken overnight at 37 °C. The resulting digest was then reduced (addition of 4 µL x 500 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Roche) in AB; 10 min. shaking at 60 °C) and alkylated (addition of 12 µL x 500 mM iodoacetamide (IAM, Sigma), in AB; 30 min. shaking at RT). Peptides were acidified by addition of 5 µL x 10% trifluoroacetic acid (Riedel-de Haën) in DI water, and cleaned by two-phase extraction (3 x addition of 200 µL ethyl acetate, Sigma, followed by vortexing and aspiration of the organic layer). Peptides were desalted, in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol, using POROS R3 beads (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized. Peptide concentrations (measured by Direct Detect spectrophotometer, Millipore) in injection buffer (5% HPLC grade acetonitrile, Fisher Scientific, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in DI water) were adjusted to 300 ng/µL. Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a multistep gradient from 95% A (0.1% FA in water) and 5% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 7% B at 1 min, 18% B at 58 min, 27% B in 72 min and 60% B at 74 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 75 mm x 250 μm i.d. 1.7 uM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra from multiple samples were aligned using Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) and searched using Mascot (Matrix Science UK), against the SWISS-Prot and TREMBL human databases. The peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues (monoisotopic mass change, 57.021 Da), oxidized methionine (15.995 Da), hydroxylation of asparagine, aspartic acid, proline or lysine (15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine, threonine, histidine or aspartate (79.966 Da). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Peptide detection intensities were exported from Progenesis QI as Excel spreadsheets (Microsoft) for further processing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human senescent heat shock msc mesenchymal stem cell monobromobimane mbbr

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester

### Submitter
Jack Llewellyn

### Lab Head
Dr Joe Swift
The University of Manchester


