### Accession
PXD041683

### Title
Protein profiles following miRNA-23c and -4328 overexpression in prostate cancer cell lines, PC-3 and 22Rv1

### Description
The 22Rv1 and PC-3 cells were transduced with shMIMIC human lentiviral vectors (Horizon Discovery, Cambridge, UK) to stably overexpress miRNA-23c or -4328. The SMARTvector Non-Targeting Control (NTC) was expressed to serve as a negative control. The vectors contained a turbo green fluorescent protein (turboGFP) and a puromycin resistance gene cassette. After transduction, cells were cultured in a medium supplemented with 5 µg/mL puromycin (Takara Bio, Tokyo, Japan) for antibiotic selection. Overexpression was confirmed by monitoring the turboGFP by fluorescence microscopy and by RT-qPCR analysis of miRNA-23c and -4328 levels.  Relative protein quantification was performed to compare protein expression in 22Rv1 and PC-3 single cell clones overexpressing miRNA-23c and -4328, compared to corresponding NTC cells. Single cell clones overexpressing either miRNA-23c (n = 3), -4328 (n = 3) or NTC (n = 3) were analyzed in triplicate.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were homogenized in lysis buffer (200 μl, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate) using FastPrep® (lysis matrix B, MP Biomedicals) and protein concentration was determined by Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific). The samples and two references (representative pools from PC3 or 22Rv1 cell samples) were digested using modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, samples (13 µg) were reduced (100 mM dithiothreitol, 60°C, 30 min), transferred to cut-off filters (30 kDa MWCO Pall Nanosep, Sigma-Aldrich), washed several times with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (DB, 50 mM TEAB, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC)) prior to alkylation (10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in DB, RT, 30 min). Samples were digested with trypsin (Pierce MS grade Trypsin, Thermo Fisher Scientific, ratio 1:100) at 37°C overnight and an additional portion of trypsin was added and incubated for another two hours. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and labelled using 10-plex tandem mass tagging (TMT) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were combined into two TMT-set, SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and desalted (Pierce peptide desalting spin columns, Thermo Fischer Scientific). The sets were fractionated into 10 fractions with basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) with a gradient from 3% to 100% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00 over 23 min at a flow of 400 µL/min.  Each fraction was analysed on Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer interfaced with nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an in-house constructed analytical column (350x0.075 mm I.D.) packed with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr Maisch, Germany) using a gradient from 3% to 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid over 85 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. Precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at 120 000 resolution and MS2 analysis was performed in a data-dependent multinotch mode where precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window. Peptides with charge states 2 to 7 were selected for fragmentation CID 35 and dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s and 10 ppm. The top 5 most abundant MS2 fragment ions were isolated simultaneous for fragmentation (MS3) by HCD 65 and detected in the Orbitrap at 50 000 resolutions.

### Data Protocol
The data files for each set were merged for identification and relative quantification using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was against Homo Sapiens (Swissprot Database Nov 2020) using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) with MS peptide tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with one missed cleavage, variable modifications of methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine. Percolator was used for the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) validation with the strict false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 1%. Samples were normalized on the total peptide amount. For protein quantification unique peptides at FDR threshold 1% with a minimum SPS 65 were taken into account. The reference samples were used as denominator and for calculation of the ratios. Quantified proteins were filtered at 5% FDR, variance-stabilized and then used to carry out differential enrichment analysis on R (v4.0.5) using the DEP (v1.20.0) package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Overexpression, Cell lines, Nano lc-ms/ms, Mircorna, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Umeå University
Department of Medical Biosciences, Pathology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden

### Submitter
Pernilla Wikström

### Lab Head
Dr Pernilla Wikström
Department of Medical Biosciences, Pathology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden


