### Accession
PXD048684

### Title
Idenfication the receptor on KRAS p.G12D cell that interact with FN1859

### Description
To capture the unknown receptors, we purified recombinant His-tagged FN1859 proteins from Escherichia coli and performed His-tag pull-down assays with WT, KRAS p.G13D and KRAS p.G12D cell lysates. Then the bands submitted for mass spectrometry (MS) protein identification.

### Sample Protocol
Scoop out the area where the protein is located in SDS-PAGE and cut it into small pieces about 1 mm3. Add double steaming water to soak the glue block, shake for 10 minutes, absorb the lotion; The glue block was immersed in 50% ACN/100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) solution, shook for 10 minutes, and the lotion was absorbed. The process was repeated three times. Add 100% ACN impregnated glue block, shake for 10 minutes, absorb the lotion, and then drain the glue block in a vacuum draining machine; 10 mM DTT/50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) solution was added to the glue block, incubated at 56℃ for 1h for reduction reaction, and then the leaching solution was removed. After that, 55 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) solution was added, and the solution was incubated at room temperature and dark place for 30 minutes. Add 100% ACN, shake for 20 minutes, absorb the infusion, drain the glue block; Appropriate amount of trypsin was added to the glue blocks, and 50 mM NH4HCO3 solution was added to completely cover the glue blocks, and the glue blocks were incubated at 37℃ overnight for enzyme digestion. Then 60% ACN/5% formic acid was added, ultrasonic shock was performed for 10 minutes, and the supernatant was absorbed into the new centrifuge tube after centrifugation. After the extraction process is repeated twice, the extracted liquid is combined and drained in the centrifugal concentrator. The peptide was desalted using C18 column and frozen at -20℃ for machine detection.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrum data generated by TripleTOF 5600 was retrieved by ProteinPilot (V4.5), and the database retrieval algorithm was Paragon. The database used for the search was the Human proteome reference database in UniProt. Search parameters are as follows: Sample Type Select Identification; Cys Alkylation Iodoacetamide; Digestion Trypsin; The Search Effort is set to Rapid ID. The search results were screened based on Unused≥1.3, the retrieved items and contaminating proteins were deleted from the reverse database, and the remaining identification information was used for subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kras p.g12d fn1859

### Affiliations
Tongji University School of Medicine
Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Huiyuan Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Huanlong Qin
Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine


