### Accession
PXD025915

### Title
Proteomics analysis of bile acids modulation on rat colonic expression of water, electrolyte and drug transporters

### Description
Bile acid diarrhoea is a chronic condition with increased delivery of bile acids to the colon causing diarrhoea. In this study we used a rodent model of bile acid malabsorption to investigate the general impact on increased levels of bile acids on mRNA- and protein-expression in colon epithelial cells. Twelve male Wistar Munich rats were housed in metabolic cages and fed control or bile acid-mixed (1% w/w) diets for ten days. After euthanasia, colonic epithelial cells were isolated using Ca2+ chelation and processed for mass spectrometry-based proteomics to quantify changes in protein expressions.

### Sample Protocol
The isolated CECs were homogenized in dissection buffer and protein content estimated using a Bradford assay (Biorad). A total of 10 samples from control (n=5) and treated (n=5) rats were selected for proteomic analysis based on highest protein concentration. A volume containing approximately 150 µg of proteins was added to 500 µL of lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 1% SDS plus protease (cOmplete, Sigma-Aldrich) and phosphatase (PhosSTOP, Sigma-Aldrich) inhibitors. Samples were sonicated using a probe sonicator for 5 cycles (5 seconds on and 5 seconds off as one cycle) and centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min to remove cell debris. The supernatant was saved and protein concentration was measured by a standard BCA assay (Pierce, Thermo Scientific).  100 µg proteins from each sample was transferred to a 30 kDa MW cutoff spin column (Vivacon 500), and centrifuged at 16,000 g until all liquid passes filter. The spin column was then washed with 400 µL of UA buffer (UA buffer: 8 M urea plus 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific)) three times. The proteins were reduced by 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Thermo Scientific) in UA buffer at room temperature for 1 h followed by centrifugation at 16,000 g, and then alkylated by 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Thermo Scientific) in UA buffer in the dark for 20 min followed by centrifugation. The spin column was washed with 400 µL of UA buffer and centrifuged until dry. 20 µL UA buffer containing 1 µg of lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) was added onto the spin column and samples incubated at 37°C for 3 h. 200 µL of 100 mM TEAB containing 2 Iµg of trypsin (Thermo Scientific) was added and samples incubated overnight. Peptides were collected the next morning by centrifugation and peptide concentration was measured by a fluorometric peptide assay (Thermo Scientific). 10–plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT, Thermo Scientific) labeling was used and performed according to the manufacturer’s guidelines as previously described. Briefly, 22 µg of peptides from each sample were labeled with one tag, and 10 labeled samples (5 control samples and 5 BA-treated samples) were pooled together. The tags of 126, 127N, 128C, 129N and 130N were used to label control samples, and the tags of 127C, 128N, 129C, 130C and 131 were used to label BA-treated samples. The pooled labeled peptides were fractionated into 8 fractions using a high pH fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s guidelines. The fractions were vacuum-dried and re-suspended in 0.1 % formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were combined in one search using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1) with both Sequest and Mascot against a Uniprot rat database downloaded on 6th January 2017. Acetylation of Protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine, and TMT label on peptide N-terminus and lysine were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. TMT quantification was enabled with correction factor for the specific batch taken into account per manufacturer’s instruction.

### Publication Abstract
Bile acid diarrhea is a chronic condition caused by increased delivery of bile acids to the colon. The underlying mechanisms remain to be elucidated. To investigate genes involved in bile acid diarrhea, systems-level analyses were used on a rat bile acid diarrhea model. Twelve male Wistar Munich rats, housed in metabolic cages, were fed either control or bile acid-mixed (1% wt/wt) diets for 10 days. Food intake, water intake, urine volume, body weight, and fecal output were monitored daily. After euthanasia, colonic epithelial cells were isolated using calcium chelation and processed for systems-level analyses, that is, RNA-sequencing transcriptomics and mass spectrometry proteomics. Bile acid-fed rats suffered diarrhea, indicated by increased drinking, feces weight, and fecal water content compared with control rats. Urine output was unchanged. With bile acid feeding, RNA-sequencing revealed 204 increased and 401 decreased mRNAs; mass spectrometry revealed 183 increased and 111 decreased proteins. Among the altered genes were genes associated with electrolyte and water transport (including <i>Slc12a7</i>, <i>Clca4</i>, and <i>Aqp3</i>) and genes associated with bile acid transport (<i>Slc2b1</i>, <i>Abcg2</i>, <i>Slc51a</i>, <i>Slc51b</i>, and <i>Fabp</i>s). Correlation analysis showed a significant positive correlation (Pearson's <i>r</i> = 0.28) between changes in mRNA expression and changes in protein expression. However, caution must be exercised in making a direct correlation between experimentally determined transcriptomes and proteomes. Genes associated with bile acid transport responded to bile acid feeding, suggesting that colonic bile acid transport also occur by regulated protein facilitated mechanisms in addition to passive diffusion. In summary, the study provides annotated rat colonic epithelial cell transcriptome and proteome with response to bile acid feeding.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> Feeding rats with a bile acid caused changes in fecal output, underlining this bile acid diarrhea model's usefulness. Colonic epithelial expression of genes associated with facilitated transport of bile acids was altered during bile acid feeding. The study raises the possibility of regulated colonic transepithelial transport of bile acids in response to luminal bile acids. In addition, this study provides annotated rat colonic epithelial cell transcriptome and proteome with response to bile acid feeding.

### Keywords
Rat, Bile acid, Proteomics, Colon, Transporter

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University

### Submitter
Qi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Hanne B. Møller
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University


