### Accession
PXD001559

### Title
Global phosphoproteomic mapping of early mitotic exit in human cells identifies novel substrate dephosphorylation motifs

### Description
Entry into mitosis is driven by the coordinated phosphorylation of thousands of proteins. For the cell to complete mitosis and divide into two identical daughter cells it must regulate dephosphorylation of these proteins in a highly ordered, temporal manner. There is currently a lack of a complete understanding of the phosphorylation changes that occur during the initial stages of mitotic exit in human cells. Therefore, we performed a large unbiased, global analysis to map the very first dephosphorylation events that occur as cells exit mitosis. We identified and quantified the modification of >16,000 phosphosites on >3,300 unique proteins during early mitotic exit, providing up to 8-fold greater resolution than previous studies. Only a small fraction (~10%) of phosphorylation sites were dephosphorylated during early mitotic exit and these occurred on proteins involved in critical early exit events, including organization of the mitotic spindle, the spindle assembly checkpoint, and reformation of the nuclear envelope. Surprisingly this enrichment was observed across all kinase consensus motifs, indicating that it is independent of the upstream phosphorylating kinase. Therefore, dephosphorylation of these sites is likely determined by the specificity of phosphatase/s rather than the activity of kinase/s. Dephosphorylation was significantly affected by the amino acids at and surrounding the phosphorylation site, with several unique evolutionarily conserved amino acids correlating strongly with phosphorylation status. These data provide a potential mechanism for the specificity of phosphatases, and how they co-ordinate the ordered events of mitotic exit. In summary, our results provide a global overview of the phosphorylation changes that occur during the very first stages of mitotic exit, providing novel mechanistic insight into how phosphatase/s specifically regulate this critical transition.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were SILAC-labeled by culturing in DMEM in which the natural “light” Lysine and Arginine were replaced by "heavy" isotope-labeled amino acids 13C615N4-L-Arginine (Arg 10) and 13C615N2-L-Lysine (Lys 8) (Silantes GmBH) which was supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS and 4mM glutamine. Cells were cultured for approximately six doublings to reach complete labeling of >97% and then synchronized using thymidine and released into Nocodazole (100 ng/ml) for 12 h. Mitotic cells were enriched by shake off, and both light and heavy labeled samples were treated with 25 µM MG132 for 15 minutes. Heavy labeled samples were then treated with 10 µM RO3306 (RO) for a further 15 minutes, with both samples then harvested by centrifugation at 4ºC. Three biological replicates were prepared, and in one replicate, the heavy/light labels were switched to provide an internal labeling control. Cells were lysed in urea lysis buffer (2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM B-glycerol phosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM tris (2-carboxy- ethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 1 mM EDTA, 8 M urea and 20 mM HEPES), sonicated, and then iodoacetamide was added to 100 mM. Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Scoresby, VIC, Australia). Samples were then mixed 1:1 (light:heavy) based on quantification of total protein and digested in-solution with modified TPCK treated trypsin (Promega). Peptides were desalted on C18 solid-phase extraction columns and separated into 9 fractions by strong-cation exchange (SCX) using the ÄKTApurifier (GE Healthcare) followed by TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment as previously described (26, 27). Peptides were resuspended in 0.5% acetic acid and loaded onto a laser-drawn ~30 cm, 75 µm I.D. fused silica column, packed in house with 3 µm ReproSil Pur-120 C18AQ beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany) using an Easy nLC-II (ThermoFisher Scientific) and eluted with a linear gradient of 0 – 30% acetonitrile containing 0.5% acetic acid.  Phosphopeptides were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A precursor MS scan (350 – 1650 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 followed by data-dependent CID MS/MS in the LTQ of up to 20 most abundant precursor ions. Mass spectra were processed with version 1.2.7.4 of the MaxQuant software package (http://www.maxquant.org) using default settings with the inclusion of match between runs option. Peptides were assigned incorporating modified arginine-10 and lysine-6, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, using the fixed modification carboxyamidomethyl, and variable methionine oxidation and STY phosphorylation. Database searching was performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment (28) against the complete human proteome containing 88,820 sequence entries (UniProt release-2013_06, ftp://ftp.uniprot.org). Precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm for initial search, fragmentation peptide to 0.6 Da. To ensure high quality protein identifications, MS spectra were also searched against a reverse database of a similar size with the false discovery rate limited to < 1%. Known contaminants identified by MaxQuant were filtered out of the initial dataset. Phosphosite identifications were filtered for greater than 0.75 localization probability and a minimum MaxQuant score of 30 and a maximum posterior error probability of 1% to ensure that only highly confident protein identifications were reported. A fold change cut off of ≥ 4 (log2 ratio  ≥ +2 or ≤ -2) was used to identify increased and dephosphorylated phosphopeptides, respectively. A moderated t-test was used to identify phosphosites that are significantly up or down-regulated using Linear Models for Microarray and RNA-Seq Data (LIMMA) package in R (29). LIMMA allows for global variance shrinkage using an empirical Bayes model. Identified sites were then corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using Benjamini & Hochberg method (controlling for 5% false discovery rate). Phosphopeptides were considered to be stable if they were non-significant proteins (adj.P.value > 0.05), and had log2 ratios between -0.25 and +0.25 with a standard deviation <0.5. All mass spectrometry proteomics data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http:// proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (30) with the identifier PXD001559. Supplemental Table S1 contains a summary of all the phosphosites identified, along with moderated t-statistics, p-values and adjusted p-values for all phosphosites. In addition, each phosphosite is annotated for all potential upstream kinases based on motif, PhosphoSitePlus, and KinomeXplorer prediction methods.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel and the bioinformatics platform Perseus (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich), and enrichment analysis was performed using Venny (bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/). Clustering and protein interactions were performed using STRING 9.1 (http://string-db.org/) (31), while Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment was performed with Enrichr (http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/) (32). Motif enrichment analysis of phosphopeptides was performed with MMFPh (33), Icelogo (34) and WebLogo 3 (35). Novel motifs were scanned for potential upstream kinases using the Phospho Motif Finder software incorporated into the HPRD database (http://www.hprd.org/PhosphoMotif_finder), and using KinomeXplorer (http://kinomexplorer.info) (36). Heat maps were created using Matrix2png (37). Geneious version R7.1 was used for sequence alignments of Myc and PRC1 (38).  Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 6 software using an unpaired nonparametric Kolmogorov-Smirnov t-test to determine population distribution differences.

### Publication Abstract
Entry into mitosis is driven by the coordinated phosphorylation of thousands of proteins. For the cell to complete mitosis and divide into two identical daughter cells it must regulate dephosphorylation of these proteins in a highly ordered, temporal manner. There is currently a lack of a complete understanding of the phosphorylation changes that occur during the initial stages of mitotic exit in human cells. Therefore, we performed a large unbiased, global analysis to map the very first dephosphorylation events that occur as cells exit mitosis. We identified and quantified the modification of &gt;16,000 phosphosites on &gt;3300 unique proteins during early mitotic exit, providing up to eightfold greater resolution than previous studies. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001559. Only a small fraction (&#x223c; 10%) of phosphorylation sites were dephosphorylated during early mitotic exit and these occurred on proteins involved in critical early exit events, including organization of the mitotic spindle, the spindle assembly checkpoint, and reformation of the nuclear envelope. Surprisingly this enrichment was observed across all kinase consensus motifs, indicating that it is independent of the upstream phosphorylating kinase. Therefore, dephosphorylation of these sites is likely determined by the specificity of phosphatase/s rather than the activity of kinase/s. Dephosphorylation was significantly affected by the amino acids at and surrounding the phosphorylation site, with several unique evolutionarily conserved amino acids correlating strongly with phosphorylation status. These data provide a potential mechanism for the specificity of phosphatases, and how they co-ordinate the ordered events of mitotic exit. In summary, our results provide a global overview of the phosphorylation changes that occur during the very first stages of mitotic exit, providing novel mechanistic insight into how phosphatase/s specifically regulate this critical transition.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics, Spindle assembly checkpoint., Mitosis, Kinase, Prc1, Myc, Silac, Phosphatase, Motif, Mitotic exit

### Affiliations
The Kinghorn Cancer Center, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, NSW, 2010, Australia. St. Vincent's Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, UNSW, Darlinghurst, NSW, Australia
Garvan Institute of Medical Research

### Submitter
Andrew Burgess

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Burgess
The Kinghorn Cancer Center, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, NSW, 2010, Australia. St. Vincent's Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, UNSW, Darlinghurst, NSW, Australia


