### Accession
PXD040583

### Title
Potential of Negative Ion Mode Proteomics: MS1-Only Approach

### Description
Advancing Negative Ion Mode Proteomics. The main objective of the project is the exploration of the unconvetional negative ion mode for proteomics studies. In this work, we thoroughly studied the best chromatographic conditions for negative ion mode proteomics before testing different enzymatic digestion. The final goal is to establish the best working conditions in the negative polarity for negative ion mode. The method also refrains from any fragmentation events, which are unpredictable in negative ion mode.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells (≈10^6) were lysed using 400 µL lysis buffer (1% SDC, 10 mM TCEP and 20 mM CAA in 0.1 M TEAB buffer, pH 8) at 90 ⁰C during 30 minutes. After sonication, aliquots of 80 µL were diluted with 120 µL of 0.1 M TEAB buffer, pH 8, and digested using different enzymes (AspN, GluC, LysC and trypsin) overnight at 37 ⁰C (25 ⁰C in the case of GluC). Samples were desalted prior to MS measurement. Every digestion was measured in positive and negative ion mode using different short gradients (5, 10 and 15 minutes). For each enzyme and chromatogram time, the sample was measured in quadruplicate.

### Data Protocol
ms1searchpy engine was employed for processing all acquired data. ms1searchpy allows protein identification for MS/MS free data in both polarities; and the combination of different replicates and polarities.

### Publication Abstract
Current proteomics approaches rely almost exclusively on using the positive ionization mode, resulting in inefficient ionization of many acidic peptides. This study investigates protein identification efficiency in the negative ionization mode using the DirectMS1 method. DirectMS1 is an ultrafast data acquisition method based on accurate peptide mass measurements and predicted retention times. Our method achieves the highest rate of protein identification in the negative ion mode to date, identifying over 1000 proteins in a human cell line at a 1% false discovery rate. This is accomplished using a single-shot 10 min separation gradient, comparable to lengthy MS/MS-based analyses. Optimizing separation and experimental conditions was achieved by utilizing mobile buffers containing 2.5 mM imidazole and 3% isopropanol. The study emphasized the complementary nature of data obtained in positive and negative ion modes. Combining the results from all replicates in both polarities increased the number of identified proteins to 1774. Additionally, we analyzed the method's efficiency using different proteases for protein digestion. Among the four studied proteases (LysC, GluC, AspN, and trypsin), trypsin and LysC demonstrated the highest protein identification yield. This suggests that digestion procedures utilized in positive-mode proteomics can be effectively applied in the negative ion mode. Data are deposited to ProteomeXchange: PXD040583.

### Keywords
Negative ion mode, Proteomics, Ms/ms free

### Affiliations
University of South Denmark
Profesor at the Faculty of Science, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark (SDU), Odense, Denmark

### Submitter
Pelayo Alvarez Penanes

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Kjeldsen
Profesor at the Faculty of Science, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark (SDU), Odense, Denmark


