### Accession
PXD033649

### Title
Combined measurements of proteome and cell turnover reveal the influences of tissue context and pathological aging on protein and organelle lifetimes

### Description
The lifespans of proteins can range from moments to years within mammalian tissues. Protein lifespan is relevant to organismal aging, as long-lived proteins can accrue damage over time. It is unclear how protein lifetime is shaped by tissue context, where both cell division and proteolytic degradation contribute to protein turnover. Here, we develop turnover and replication analysis by 15N isotope labeling (TRAIL) for parallel quantification of protein and cell lifetimes. We deploy TRAIL over 32 days in 4 mouse tissues to quantify cell proliferation with high precision and no toxicity and determine that protein lifespan varies independently of cell lifespan. Variation in protein lifetime is non-random: multiprotein complexes such as the ribosome have consistent lifetimes across tissues, while mitochondria, peroxisomes, and lipid droplets have variable lifetimes across tissues. To model the effects of aging on tissue homeostasis, we apply TRAIL to progeroid mice and uncover fat-specific alterations in cell lifetime and proteome composition, as well as a broad decrease in protein turnover flux. These data indicate that environmental factors influence protein turnover in vivo and provide a framework to understand proteome aging in tissue context.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 30 mg of frozen tissue were excised on dry ice with a clean razorblade and placed in a fresh tube. 100 uL of protein extraction buffer was added to the tube. The tissue was rapidly minced with clean dissection scissors on ice for 30-60 seconds until no large pieces remained. PEB was added to bring the final volume to 600 uL, then the sample was transferred to a Dounce homogenizer. The sample was homogenized for ~40 strokes with the tight pestle, then was transferred to a clean microcentrifuge tube. The sample was then probe sonicated at 4C before being centrifuged. The supernatant was transferred to a clean tube, and aliquots were separated for proteomics and protein quantification by microBSA assay. Samples were diluted to 1 mg/mL in 5% SDS, 100 mM TEAB. 25 µg of protein from each sample was reduced with dithiothreitol to 2 mM, followed by incubation at 55°C for 60 minutes. IAA was added to 10 mM and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes to alkylate the proteins. Phosphoric acid was added to 1.2%, followed by six volumes of 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB. The resulting solution was added to S-Trap micro and centrifuged. The S-Traps containing trapped protein were washed twice by centrifuging through 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB. 1 µg of trypsin was added to the S-Trap, followed by an additional 20 µL of TEAB. The cap to the S-Trap was loosely screwed on but not tightened to ensure the solution was not pushed out of the S-Trap during digestion. Samples were placed in a humidity chamber at 37°C overnight. The next morning, the S-Trap was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 1 minute to collect the digested peptides. Sequential additions of 0.1% TFA in acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA in 50% acetonitrile were added to the S-trap, centrifuged, and pooled. Samples were frozen and dried down in a Speed Vac prior to TMTpro labeling. Samples were reconstituted in TEAB to 1 mg/mL, then labeled with TMTpro 16plex reagents following the manufacturers protocol. Since we performed quantitation on the unlabeled peptides, 0 day samples were added to four of the unused channels, increasing the signal for the unlabeled peptides. TMTpro tagged samples were frozen, dried down in the Speed Vac, and then desalted using homemade C18 spin columns to remove excess tag prior to high pH fractionation. Homemade C18 spin columns were activated with two 50 µL washes of acetonitrile via centrifugation, followed by equilibration with two 50 µL washes of 0.1% TFA. Desalted, TMTpro tagged peptides were brought up in 50 µL of 0.1% TFA and added to the spin column. After centrifugation, the column was washed once with water, then once with 10 mM ammonium hydroxide. Fractions were eluted off the column with centrifugation by stepwise addition of 10 mM ammonium hydroxide with the following concentrations of acetonitrile: 2%, 3.5%, 5%, 6.5%, 8%, 9.5%, 11%, 12.5%, 14%, 15.5%, 17%, 18.5%, 20%, 21.5%, 27%, and 50%. The sixteen fractions were concatenated down to 8 by combining fractions 1 and 9, 2 and 10, etc. Fractionated samples were frozen, dried down in the Speed Vac, and brought up in 0.1% TFA prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides from each fraction were injected onto a homemade 30 cm C18 column with 1.8 um beads, with an Easy nLC-1200 HPLC, connected to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, while solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Ions were introduced to the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex source operating at 2 kV. The gradient began at 3% B and held for 2 minutes, increased to 10% B over 7 minutes, increased to 38% B over 94 minutes, then ramped up to 90% B in 5 minutes and was held for 3 minutes, before returning to starting conditions in 2 minutes and re-equilibrating for 7 minutes, for a total run time of 120 minutes. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, employing the MultiNotch SPS MS3 method to increase quantitative accuracy78. The cycle time was set to 3 seconds. Monoisotopic Precursor Selection was set to Peptide. The full scan was done over a range of 400-1500 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z of 200, an AGC target of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptides with a charge state between 2-5 were picked for fragmentation. Precursor ions were fragmented by CID using a collision energy of 35% and an isolation width of 1.0 m/z. MS2 scans were collected in the ion trap with an AGC target of 1e4 and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. MS3 scans were performed by fragmenting the 10 most intense fragment ions between 400-2000 m/z, excluding ions that were 40 m/z less and 10 m/z greater than the precursor peptide, using HCD. MS3 ions were detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200 over a scan range of 100-300 m/z. The isolation width was set to 2 Da, the collision energy was 60%, the AGC was set to 1e5, and the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched using the SEQUEST search engine within the Proteome Discoverer software platform, version 2.4, using the Uniprot mouse database (downloaded January 2020). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, with an MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and an MS2 mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine, and TMTpro on lysine and peptide N-terminus were set as a fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Percolator was used as the FDR calculator, filtering out peptides which had a q-value greater than 0.01. Reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier node, with an integration tolerance of 20 ppm, and the integration method being set to “most confident centroid”. Protein abundances were calculated by summing the signal to noise of the reporter ions from each identified peptide, while excluding any peptides with an isolation interference of greater than 30%, or SPS matches less than 65%. The kinetic model applied in this study has been previously described.

### Publication Abstract
The lifespans of proteins range from minutes to years within mammalian tissues. Protein lifespan is relevant to organismal aging, as long-lived proteins accrue damage over time. It is unclear how protein lifetime is shaped by tissue context, where both cell turnover and proteolytic degradation contribute to protein turnover. We develop turnover and replication analysis by <sup>15</sup> N isotope labeling (TRAIL) to quantify protein and cell lifetimes with high precision and demonstrate that cell turnover, sequence-encoded features, and environmental factors modulate protein lifespan across tissues. Cell and protein turnover flux are comparable in proliferative tissues, while protein turnover outpaces cell turnover in slowly proliferative tissues. Physicochemical features such as hydrophobicity, charge, and disorder influence protein turnover in slowly proliferative tissues, but protein turnover is much less sequence-selective in highly proliferative tissues. Protein lifetimes vary nonrandomly across tissues after correcting for cell turnover. Multiprotein complexes such as the ribosome have consistent lifetimes across tissues, while mitochondria, peroxisomes, and lipid droplets have variable lifetimes. TRAIL can be used to explore how environment, aging, and disease affect tissue homeostasis.

### Keywords
Silam, Proteostasis, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
University of Rochester Medical Center Mass Spectrometry Shared Resource Laboratory
Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA Department of Physiology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA

### Submitter
Kyle Swovick

### Lab Head
Dr Abigail Buchwalter
Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA Department of Physiology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA


