### Accession
PXD038846

### Title
Discovery of biomarkers for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis from human cerebrospinal fluid using mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Description
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is progressive neurodegenerative diseases characterized by the relentless loss of upper and lower motor neurons, eventually leading to death. Critical to the mission of developing effective therapies for ALS is the discovery of biomarkers that can illuminate mechanisms of neurodegeneration, as well as that, can be used for diagnostic, prognostic, or pharmacodynamic value across the disease. Here, we merged unbiased discovery-based approaches and targeted quantitative comparative analyses to identify proteins that are altered in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from ALS. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic approaches employing tandem mass tags (TMT) quantification methods from 40 CSF samples comprising 20 patients with ALS and 20 healthy control (HC) individuals identified 53 candidate biomarker proteins after CSF fractionation. Notably, these candidate biomarkers included both previously identified proteins validating our approach and novel ones, expanding the applicability of the biomarkers. Candidate biomarkers were subsequently examined using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) MS methods on 61 unfractionated CSF samples comprising 30 patients with ALS and 31 HC individuals. Fifteen candidate biomarkers (APOB, APP, CAMK2A, CHI3L1, CHIT1, CLSTN3, ERAP2, FSTL4, GPNMB, JCHAIN, L1CAM, NPTX2, SERPINA1, SERPINA3 and UCHL1) showed significant differences between ALS and Control. Taken together, this study identifies multiple novel proteins that are altered in ALS, which provides the foundation for developing biomarkers for ALS.

### Sample Protocol
Four experimental sets of 10 samples were examined, with each set including a master pool (MP) sample for normalization between sets. The MP was prepared by combining an equal volume from all 40 CSF samples including HC and ALS (Figure 1A). The CSF samples were mixed with a urea buffer, which was composed of 10 M urea/20 mM tris (2-Carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP)/80 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), at a one-to-one ratio. The samples were then incubated for 1 h at RT for reduction and alkylation. Protein digestion was carried out using LysC (lysyl endopeptidase mass spectrometry grade, Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical Industries Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan) at a one-to-fifty ratio for 3 h at 37°C and subsequently with trypsin digestion (sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) at a one-to-fifty ratio at 37°C overnight after diluting the concentration of urea from 5 M to 2 M by adding 50 mM TEAB. Peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips (3M EmporeTM; 3M, St. Paul, MN, USA) after acidifying with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to the final concentration. The eluted solution containing peptides was dried with a Savant SPD121P SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific) and then stored at ‒80°C before use. To perform TMT -based quantitative mass spectrometry, the digested peptides from CSF samples were labeled using 11-plex TMT reagents following the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MP sample was labeled with 131C, and CSFs from ALS and HC individuals were labeled with the rest of the TMT tags. The labeling reaction was performed for 1 h at RT after mixing each peptide in 100 mM TEAB with TMT reagent in acetonitrile (ACN, HPLC grade), and then quenched by adding 1/10 volume of 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). The TMT-labeled peptides were pooled, resuspended with 10 mM TEAB, and then subjected to bRPLC (basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography) fractionation to generate fractions on an Agilent 1260 offline HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), which includes a binary pump, variable wavelength detector, an autosampler, and an automatic fraction collector. The pooled samples were reconstituted in solvent A (10 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) and loaded onto Agilent 300 Extend-C18 column (5 µm, 4.6 mm × 250 mm, Agilent Technologies). Peptides were resolved using a gradient of solvent B (10 mM TEAB in 90% ACN, pH 8.5) at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min over 90 minutes, collecting 96 fractions. Subsequently, the fractions were concatenated into 24 fractions, followed by vacuum drying using a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The dried peptides were suspended in 0.5% formic acid (FA), and 30% of each fraction was injected for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired tandem mass spectrometry data were searched against the human UniProt database (released in May 2018, containing protein entries with common contaminants) using the SEQUEST search algorithm through the Thermo Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for quantitation and identification. During MS/MS preprocessing, the top 10 peaks in each window of 100 m/z were selected for database searches. The search parameters included two maximum missed-cleavage sites by trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme. Carbamidomethyl (+57.02146 Da) at cysteine and TMT reagents (+229.162932 Da) modification at the N-terminus of peptide and lysine residues were set as fixed modifications while oxidation (+15.99492 Da) of methionine was a variable modification. For MS data, the MS1 error tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS/MS error tolerance to 0.02 Da. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids, and proteins identified by one peptide were filtered out. Both peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1% false discovery rate. The protein quantification was performed with the following parameters and methods. The most confident centroid option was used for the integration mode while the reporter ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. MS order was set to MS2. The activation type was set to HCD. The quantification value correction was disabled. Both unique and razor peptides were used for peptide quantification. Protein groups were considered for peptide uniqueness. Missing intensity values were replaced with the minimum value. Reporter ion abundance was computed based on the signal-to-noise ratio. Quantification value corrections for isobaric tags were disabled. The co-isolation threshold was set to 50%. The average reporter signal-to-noise threshold was set to 50. Data normalization was disabled. Protein grouping was performed by applying the strict parsimony principle as follows; 1) all proteins that share the same set or subset of identified peptides were grouped, 2) protein groups that have no unique peptides among the considered peptides were filtered out, 3) Proteome Discoverer iterated through all spectra and selected which peptide-spectrum match (PSM) to use in ambiguous cases to make a protein group with the highest number of unambiguous and unique peptides, and 4) final protein groups were generated. The Proteome Discoverer summed all the reporter ion abundances of PSMs for the corresponding proteins in a TMT run.

### Publication Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by the loss of upper and lower motor neurons, which eventually may lead to death. Critical to the mission of developing effective therapies for ALS is the discovery of biomarkers that can illuminate mechanisms of neurodegeneration and have diagnostic, prognostic, or pharmacodynamic value. Here, we merged unbiased discovery-based approaches and targeted quantitative comparative analyses to identify proteins that are altered in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from patients with ALS. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic approaches employing tandem mass tag (TMT) quantification methods from 40 CSF samples comprising 20 patients with ALS and 20 healthy control (HC) individuals identified 53 proteins that are differential between the two groups after CSF fractionation. Notably, these proteins included both previously identified ones, validating our approach, and novel ones that have the potential for expanding biomarker repertoire. The identified proteins were subsequently examined using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) MS methods on 61 unfractionated CSF samples comprising 30 patients with ALS and 31 HC individuals. Fifteen proteins (APOB, APP, CAMK2A, CHI3L1, CHIT1, CLSTN3, ERAP2, FSTL4, GPNMB, JCHAIN, L1CAM, NPTX2, SERPINA1, SERPINA3, and UCHL1) showed significant differences between ALS and the control. Taken together, this study identified multiple novel proteins that are altered in ALS, providing the foundation for developing new biomarkers for ALS.

### Keywords
And biomarker, Proteomics, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Cerebrospinal fluid, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Assistant Professor of Neurology Institute for Cell Engineering Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
chanhyun na

### Lab Head
Dr Chan-Hyun NA
Assistant Professor of Neurology Institute for Cell Engineering Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine


