### Accession
PXD022516

### Title
Fasciola hepatica egg lysates - investigation of proteolytic activity

### Description
In order to investigate proteolytic activity (presence of peptidases) in eggs of F. hepatica, we performed LC-MS analysis of eggs. Eggs were colelcted fresh and then after 5 and 10 days of incubation (embryonation). Each time point done in triplicates.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptide mixtures were done using UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (X-Bridge BEH 130 C18, dimensions 30 mm × 100 µm, 3.5 μm particles; Waters). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% formic acid (FA), the peptides were eluted in backflush mode (flow 0.3 µl.min-1) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) during 130 min gradient (1–80% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent mode, selecting up to 20 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan. The resolution of the survey scan was 120,000 (350–2,000 m/z) with a target value of 4 ×105 ions and maximum injection time of 100 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 5×104 ions (resolution 15,000 at 110 m/z) and maximum injection time of 22 ms. The isolation window for fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For data evaluation, we used MaxQuant software (v1.6.10.43)(Cox and Mann, 2008) . Searches against in-house made protein databases were undertaken: F. hepatica (9,708 sequences (12-2019) derived from the BioProject PRJEB25283, based on https://parasite.wormbase.org/Fasciola_hepatica_prjeb25283/Info/Index), Bos taurus (23,846 sequences (11-2019), based on https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000009136), and cRAP contaminants (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap). Modifications for all database searches were set as follows: oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q) as variable modifications, with carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was tryptic with two permissible miscleavages. Only peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate threshold under 0.01. Intensities of reported proteins were further evaluated using software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows/KNIME_docker_vnc; version 3.7.1a). Processing workflow is available upon request: it covers decoy hits and removal of contaminant protein groups (cRAP), protein group intensities log2 transformation and normalization (loessF). Comparative analyses were carried out using LIMMA package (Ritchie et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Fasciola hepatica is a global parasite of livestock which also causes a neglected zoonosis in humans. The parasite's communication with the host during its complicated lifecycle is based on an ingenious enzymatic apparatus which includes a variety of peptidases. These enzymes are implicated in parasite migration, pathogenesis of the disease, and modification of host immune response. Although the dynamics of proteolytic machinery produced by intra-mammalian F. hepatica life stages has been previously investigated in great detail, peptidases of the eggs so far received little scientific attention. In this study, we performed a comparative RNA-seq analysis aimed at identification of peptidases expressed in F. hepatica eggs, cultured at 37&#xa0;&#xb0;C to represent gall bladder retained eggs, for different time periods and employed mass spectrometry in order to identify and quantify peptidases translated in F. hepatica egg lysates. We demonstrated that F. hepatica eggs undergo significant molecular changes when cultured at the physiological temperature of the definitive host. Egg transcriptome is subject to numerous subtle changes while their proteome is even more variable. The peptidase profile is considerably modified on both transcriptome and proteome level. Finally, we measured and classified proteolytic activities in extracts from F. hepatica eggs using a library of fluorogenic substrates and peptidase class-selective inhibitors. Activities of threonine peptidases were detected constantly, while the cysteine peptidases prevailing in freshly laid eggs are substituted by aspartic peptidase and metallopeptidase activities in the later stages of egg development.

### Keywords
Peptidase, Fasciola, Parasite, Proteome, Mass spectrometry, Trematoda, Eggs

### Affiliations
Central European Institute of Technology, Proteomics core facility, Masaryk University, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic
Masaryk University

### Submitter
Pavel Roudnický

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
Central European Institute of Technology, Proteomics core facility, Masaryk University, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic


