### Accession
PXD014426

### Title
ZapE/Afg1 is Oxa1-dependent regulator of respiratory complexes in trypanosomes

### Description
Abstract ZapE/Afg1 is a component of the inner cell membrane of some eubacteria as well as in the inner mitochondrial membrane of eukaryotes. This protein is involved in FtsZ-dependent division of bacteria and facilitates the degradation of mitochondrion-encoded subunits of respiratory complexes. Furthermore, depletion of ZapE increases resistence to apoptosis, decreases oxidative stress tolerance, and impacts mitochondrial protein homeostasis. It is unclear whether this protein is a multifunctional protein or some observed phenotypes are a secondary consequence of respiratory chain disruption. Here, we have analyzed the functions of ZapE in Trypanosoma brucei, a parasitic protist and also an important model organism. Using a newly developed BioID2 proximity-dependent biotinylation approach, we have identified the inner mitochondrial membrane insertase Oxa1 as a direct interacting partner of ZapE, which is present in two paralogs. RNAi-mediated depletion of both ZapE paralogs affected the function of respiratory complexes I and IV. We propose that it is primarily the interaction of ZapE with Oxa1, which is required for a proper insertion of many inner mitochondrial membrane proteins, that is behind the multifaceted phenotype caused by the ablation of ZapE.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins immobilized on Dynabeads were digested with trypsin and resulting peptides were separated by nanoflow liquid chromatography. Next, peptides were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS2) on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (q-OT-IT) instrument as described elsewhere [34].   34 Černá M, Kuntová B, Talacko P, Stopková R & Stopka P (2017) Differential regulation of vaginal lipocalins (OBP, MUP) during the estrous cycle of the house mouse. Sci. Rep. 7.

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed ans quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) (Cox, Hein et al. 2014). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Trypanosoma brucei (downloaded from Uniprot on November 2018, containing 27 206 entries). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N- terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runsbased on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used inquantification experiments. Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.5.2.4 software. For statistical analysis was used Two-sample test with S0 parameter set to 0.1  (Tyanova 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Trypanosoma

### Affiliations
Charles University
Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Pyriha
Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic


