### Accession
PXD007846

### Title
A systematic evaluation of the use of human plasma and serum for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics - commercial pooled samples

### Description
Over the last two decades, EDTA-plasma has been used as the preferred sample matrix for human blood proteomic profiling. Serum has also been employed widely. Only a few studies have assessed the difference and relevance of the proteome profiles obtained from plasma samples, such as EDTA-plasma or lithium-heparin-plasma, and serum. A complete evaluation of the use of EDTA-plasma, heparin-plasma, and serum would greatly expand the comprehensiveness of shotgun proteomics of blood samples. In this study, we evaluated the use of heparin-plasma with respect to EDTA-plasma and serum to profile blood proteomes using a scalable automated proteomic pipeline (ASAP2). The use of plasma and serum for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics was tested with commercial pooled samples. The proteome coverage consistency and the quantitative performance were compared.

### Sample Protocol
Matching commercial human EDTA-plasma, lithium-heparin-plasma, and serum samples pooled from several individuals were purchased from Analytical Biological Services (Wilmington, DE). Fourteen abundant plasma proteins were depleted, following the manufacturer instructions, with MARS columns (Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE) and high performance LC systems (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with an HTC-PAL fraction collector (CTC Analytics, Zwingen, Switzerland). After immuno-depletion, samples were snap-frozen and stored at -80 °C until further use. Then, buffer exchange was performed with Polymeric RP cartridges (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) mounted on a 96-hole holder and a vacuum manifold. Samples were subsequently evaporated with a vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Scientific) and stored at -80 °C. After thawing, the samples were re-suspended in triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer with sodium dodecyl sulfate, reduced with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, alkylated with iodoacetamide, digested with trypsin/Lys-C, and 6-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) labeled. After reaction quenching with hydroxylamine, sets of six differentially labeled samples were pooled. Sample purifications were performed on a 4-channels Microlab Star liquid handler (Hamilton, Bonaduz, Switzerland) according to a previously reported protocol (Dayon et al., 2014). The pooled 6-plex TMT-labeled samples were then evaporated to dryness before storage at -80 °C. The dried samples were dissolved in 500 µL H2O/CH3CN/formic acid (FA) 96.9/3/0.1 for RP-LC MS/MS. RP-LC MS/MS was performed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer and an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific). Proteolytic peptides (injection of 5 µL of sample) were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 75 µm × 2 cm (C18, 3 µm, 100 Å) pre-column, and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) column (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (40 mm, OD 1/32”) (Thermo Scientific). The column was heated to 50 °C using a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation, Biberach, Germany). Peptide separation was performed with a gradient of mobile phase H2O/CH3CN/FA 97.9/2/0.1 and H2O/CH3CN/FA 19.92/80/0.08. The flow rate was 220 nL·min−1 with a total analysis time of 180 min. Data were acquired using a data-dependent method. A positive ion spray voltage of 1700 V and a transfer tube temperature of 275 °C were set up. For MS survey scans in profile mode, the Orbitrap resolution was 120000 at m/z = 200 (automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2 × 105) with a m/z scan range from 300 to 1500, RF lens set at 30%, and maximum injection time of 100 ms. For MS/MS with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 35% of the normalized collision energy, AGC target was set to 1 × 105 (isolation width of 0.7 in the quadrupole), with a resolution of 30000 at m/z = 200, first mass at m/z = 100, and a maximum injection time of 105 ms with Orbitrap acquiring in profile mode. A duty cycle time of 3 s (top speed mode) was used to determine the number of precursor ions to be selected for HCD-based MS/MS. Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time. Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s within a ± 10 ppm window. A lock mass of m/z = 445.1200 was used.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) was used as the data processing interface. Identification was performed against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (10/2015 release) including the β-lactoglobulin from bovine milk sequence (20198 sequences in total). Mascot (version 2.4.2, Matrix Sciences, London, UK) was used as the search engine. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidated asparagine/glutamine, and 6-plexTMT-labeled peptide amino terminus (+229.163 Da); 6-plex TMT-labeled lysine (+229.163 Da) was set as fixed modification as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of two potential missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment ion tolerance were set to, respectively, 10 ppm and 0.02 Da.  All Mascot results files were loaded separately into Scaffold Q+S 4.6 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) to be further searched with X! Tandem (version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Both peptide and protein FDRs were fixed at 1% maximum, with a two-unique-peptide criterion to report protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Over the last two decades, EDTA-plasma has been used as the preferred sample matrix for human blood proteomic profiling. Serum has also been employed widely. Only a few studies have assessed the difference and relevance of the proteome profiles obtained from plasma samples, such as EDTA-plasma or lithium-heparin-plasma, and serum. A more complete evaluation of the use of EDTA-plasma, heparin-plasma, and serum would greatly expand the comprehensiveness of shotgun proteomics of blood samples. In this study, we evaluated the use of heparin-plasma with respect to EDTA-plasma and serum to profile blood proteomes using a scalable automated proteomic pipeline (ASAP<sup>2</sup>). The use of plasma and serum for mass-spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics was first tested with commercial pooled samples. The proteome coverage consistency and the quantitative performance were compared. Furthermore, protein measurements in EDTA-plasma and heparin-plasma samples were comparatively studied using matched sample pairs from 20 individuals from the Australian Imaging, Biomarkers and Lifestyle (AIBL) Study. We identified 442 proteins in common between EDTA-plasma and heparin-plasma samples. Overall agreement of the relative protein quantification between the sample pairs demonstrated that shotgun proteomics using workflows such as the ASAP<sup>2</sup> is suitable in analyzing heparin-plasma and that such sample type may be considered in large-scale clinical research studies. Moreover, the partial proteome coverage overlaps (e.g., &#x223c;70%) showed that measures from heparin-plasma could be complementary to those obtained from EDTA-plasma.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Li-heparin, Tandem mass tag, Serum, Edta, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences
Proteomics, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Loïc Dayon

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Dayon
Proteomics, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland


