### Accession
PXD002662

### Title
Molecular responses of alveolar epithelial A549 cells to chronic exposure to titanium dioxide nanoparticles: a proteomic view

### Description
Although the biological effects of titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO2-NPs) have been studied for more than two decades, the mechanisms governing their toxicity are still unclear. We applied 2D-gel proteomics analysis on A549 epithelial alveolar cells chronically exposed for 2 months to 2.5 or 50 µg/mL of deeply characterized TiO2-NPs, in order to obtain comprehensive molecular responses that may reflect functional outcomes. We show that exposure to TiO2-NPs impacts the abundance of 30 protein species, corresponding to 22 gene products. These proteins are involved in glucose metabolism, trafficking, gene expression, mitochondrial function, proteasome activity and DNA damage response. Besides, our results suggest that p53 pathway is activated, slowing down cell cycle progression and reducing cell proliferation rate. Moreover, we report increased content of chaperones-related proteins, which suggests homeostasis re-establishment. Finally, our results highlight that chronic exposure to TiO2-NPs affects the same cellular functions as acute exposure to TiO2-NPs, although lower exposure concentrations and longer exposure times induce more intense cellular response.

### Sample Protocol
The proteome of alveolar epithelial A549 cells was separated on 2D gel electrophoresis with or without exposure to TiO2 nano-particles. Differentially expressed spots were excised and in gel digested with trypsin before nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, MS/MS data were interpreted using a local Mascot server with MASCOT 2.4.0 algorithm (Matrix Science, London, UK) against UniProtKB/SwissProt (version 2012_08, 537,505 sequences). Research was carried out in all species. A maximum of 1 trypsin missed cleavage was allowed. Spectra from QTOF were searched with a mass tolerance of 15 ppm for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS data and spectra from Ion Trap were searched with a mass tolerance of 0.3 Da in MS and MS/MS modes. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were specified as variable modifications. Protein identifications were validated with at least 2 peptides with Mascot ion score above 20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
2d gel electrophoresis, Nanolc-ms/ms, Titanium dioxide nanoparticles

### Affiliations
CNRS
CNRS UMR 5249, Laboratory of Chemistry and Biology of Metals, Grenoble, France

### Submitter
Jean-Marc STRUB

### Lab Head
Dr Thierry, Rabilloud
CNRS UMR 5249, Laboratory of Chemistry and Biology of Metals, Grenoble, France


