### Accession
PXD024672

### Title
Indentification of B7H3 WT/NQ N-Glycosites

### Description
Most patients with triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) fail to respond to anti-PD1/PDL1 immunotherapy, indicating the necessity to explore immune checkpoint targets. B7H3 is a highly glycosylated protein. However, the mechanisms of B7H3 glycosylation regulation and whether the sugar moiety contributes to immunosuppression remain elusive. Here, we identify aberrant B7H3 glycosylation and found N-glycosylation of B7H3 at NXT motif sites are responsible for its protein stability and immunosuppression in TNBC tumors. Mechanistically, fucosyltransferase FUT8 catalyzes B7H3 core fucosylation at N-glycans to maintain its high expression. Knockdown of FUT8 rescues glycosylated B7H3-mediated immunosuppressive function in TNBC cells. Abnormal B7H3 glycosylation mediated by FUT8 overexpression could be physiologically significant and clinically relevant in TNBC patients. Notably, combination of core fucosylation inhibitor 2F-Fuc and anti-PDL1 results in enhanced therapeutic efficacy in B7H3-positive TNBC tumors. These suggest targeting FUT8-B7H3 axis can be a promising strategy for improving anti-tumor immune responses in TNBC patients. To obtain the direct evidence that B7H3 is N-glycosylated in TNBC cells, we analysed the peptides of purified human B7H3 protein from B7H3-WT re-expressed and B7H3-8NQ re-expressed MDA-MB-231 cell lines by Nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (nano LC-MS/MS). The result showed that there were eight N-glycosylation sites (Asn positions 91, 104, 189, 215, 309, 322, 407, and 433) in B7H3-WT cells, but not in B7H3-8NQ cells, as determined by Asn to Asp conversion after PNGase F treatment. As B7H3 contains a nearly exact tandem duplication of the IgV-IgC domain, there were four pairs of N-glycosylation sites identified through identical peptide sequence, including N91 and N309, N104 and N322, N189 and N407, and N215 and N433, in each of the IgV-IgC domains. Together, the results indicate that B7H3 is exclusively N-glycosylated at these four pairs of glycosylation sites in TNBC cells.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel Digestion After Coomassie blue staining, the target protein band was carefully cut into ~1 mm3 cubes and destained with the mixture solution (50 mM NH4HCO3:ACN 50:50). The gel cubes were dehydrated with 100% ACN and rehydrated in 50 mM NH4HCO3 before being dehydrated by the addition of ACN. After dehydration, the remaining ACN was evaporated, and the gel cubes were dried. Gel spots were rehydrated with 50 μL of chymotrypsin (20 ng/μL in 50 mM NH4HCO3), and samples were incubated for 16 h at 37 °C. The enzymatic digestion was collected, and the gel pieces were acidified with 100 μL of 1% TFA for 60 min. Next, 100 μL of 60% ACN/0.1% TFA was added to the in-gel digestion sample for 30 min. Then, 100 μL 0.1% TFA was added to the sample for 60 min. Then, 100μL of 100% ACN was added for 15 min. The incubation temperature was 37 °C. Finally, all supernatants were combined to recover peptide segments, dried in a SpeedVac and resuspended in solvent A (0.1% FA). 18O-labeling PNGase F Digestion The digestion glycopeptides were quantified by a NanoDrop (Thermo, MA, USA). Five micrograms of glycopeptides were mixed with 100 μL of 20 mM DTT for 15 min at 95 °C. Iodoacetamide was added (40 mM final concentration) for 30 min at 25 °C in the dark. The glycopeptides were dried by SpeedVac at 45 °C and resuspended in 40 μL heavy water (H218O, 99%). Then, 10 μL PNGase F (H218O) was added, and the mixture was digested at 37 °C overnight. After the reaction, the samples were dried by SpeedVac at 45 °C and resuspended in 10 μL of H218O for nano LC-MS/MS analysis. Nano LC-MS/MS analysis The intact 18O-labeled peptides were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Briefly, the 18O-labeled peptide solutions were separated by nano liquid chromatography on a capillary column (150 μm id × 120 mm) packed with C18 (3 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. The mobile phases consisted of 0.1% FA in water (A) and 0.1% FA in acetonitrile (B). Mobile phase A (99.9% water/0.1% FA) and mobile phase B (99.9% ACN/0.1% FA) were used, and the elution gradient used was from 6 to 95% mobile phase B for 75 min. The instrument was run under the positive mode. The MS1 was analyzed with a mass range of 300-2000 at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set as 3e6, and the maximum injection time (MIT) was 80 ms. The MS2 was analyzed in the data-dependent mode, and the 25 most intense ions were subjected to fragmentation in the Orbitrap. For each scan, the AGC was set at 5e4, and the MIT was set at 45 ms. The dynamic range was set at 15 s to suppress the repeated detection of the same ion peaks.

### Data Protocol
Nano LC-MS/MS analysis The intact 18O-labeled peptides were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Briefly, the 18O-labeled peptide solutions were separated by nano liquid chromatography on a capillary column (150 μm id × 120 mm) packed with C18 (3 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. The mobile phases consisted of 0.1% FA in water (A) and 0.1% FA in acetonitrile (B). Mobile phase A (99.9% water/0.1% FA) and mobile phase B (99.9% ACN/0.1% FA) were used, and the elution gradient used was from 6 to 95% mobile phase B for 75 min. The instrument was run under the positive mode. The MS1 was analyzed with a mass range of 300-2000 at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set as 3e6, and the maximum injection time (MIT) was 80 ms. The MS2 was analyzed in the data-dependent mode, and the 25 most intense ions were subjected to fragmentation in the Orbitrap. For each scan, the AGC was set at 5e4, and the MIT was set at 45 ms. The dynamic range was set at 15 s to suppress the repeated detection of the same ion peaks.  Data processing and analysis The 18O-labeled mass spectrometry data were analyzed via pFind Studio 3.0 with the amino acid sequence of the B7H3 protein. Database search parameters were set as follows: a maximum of four missed cleavage sites permitted from Chymotrypsin digestion (FYWML), 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 20 ppm fragment mass tolerance, carbamidomethylation (C, +57.022 Da) as a fixed modification, and oxidization (M, +15.995 Da) and deamidation 18O (NQ, +2.988 Da) as dynamic modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycosites, Breast cancer, B7h3

### Affiliations
SYSUCC
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Diagnosis and Therapy, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou 510060, China

### Submitter
Kai Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Rong Deng
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Diagnosis and Therapy, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou 510060, China


