### Accession
PXD031638

### Title
Evolutionary quantitative proteomics of reproductive interactions in Drosophila

### Description
We present data using a novel method to simultaneously identify and quantify transferred male seminal proteins and the female reproductive proteome using multiplexed Tandem-Mass-Tag (TMT) isobaric labelling of the lower female reproductive tracts dissected from virgin- or recently mated- females of three species of the virilis group. We identified over 200 putative male ejaculate proteins many of which show differential abundance between species. We also identified over 2000 proteins providing the first description of the Drosophila female reproductive tract proteome outside of the melanogaster group which also shows significant divergence between species. We then assessed the utility of species-specific compared to single species query databases for protein identification and quantification.

### Sample Protocol
We paired virgin flies of the same species individually in food vials and monitored for mating which lasts ~2-5 minutes in the virilis group. We flash froze flies in liquid nitrogen within 30 seconds after copulation terminated and stored flies at -80ºC until dissections. We thawed females and dissected the lower reproductive tract (uterus, seminal receptacle and spermathecae) in a drop of phosphate buffered saline (PBS) using fine forceps. We pooled 40-50 female reproductive tracts per replicate in 50µl lysis buffer (5% SDC; 1% SDS in HPLC grade water) kept on ice, and then freeze thawed pooled samples (x 3) by placing on dry ice for 5 minutes, thawing to room temperature and then vortexing for 30 seconds. Finally, we centrifuged samples at 17000G for 5 minutes at 4ºC and collected the resulting supernatent. Samples were stored at -80ºC and shipped to the Cambridge Proteomics facility on dry ice for further processing.  Liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed at the Cambridge Proteomics facility using ThermoFisher Scientific TMTpro 16plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set 0.5mg. Labelling was performed according to product manufacture instructions. 80µg of proteins per sample was labelled and protein estimation was done using RC-DC protein assay from Bio-Rad.  Labelled samples were cleaned on SepPack C18 cartridge from Waters before being fractionated on ACQUITY UPLC system using ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 1.7um, 2.1x150mm column. Parameters of the chromatography method: flow 0.244ml/min, linear gradient starting from 95% of buffer A: 20mM ammonium formate pH10, 5% buffer B: 20mM ammonium formate in 80% acetonitrile pH10 ending at 100% of buffer B during the time of 75 minutes. PDA detector lamp setting: 210nm-400nm 1 minute fractions were collected starting from peptide elution observed on chromatogram. Fractions were concatenated: 1st fraction with the middle run fraction and so on to achieve a different elution profile per combined fraction later on when performing LC MS/MS. In total 15 fractions were produced for LC-MS/MS. Dried fractions from the high pH reverse-phase separations were resuspended in 30 µL of 0.1% formic acid and placed into a glass vial. 1 µL of each fraction was injected by the HPLC autosampler and separated by the LC method detailed below. Fractions were combined into pairs (i.e. the first fraction with the middle fraction etc.) and were analysed by LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5mm particle size, 100Å pore size, 300 mm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 auto-sampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Separation of peptides was performed by C18 reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2mm particle size, 100A pore size, 75 mm i.d. x 50cm length). Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 93 minutes. Total LC run time was 120 mins including a high organic wash step and column re-equilibration.  The eluted peptides from the C18 column LC eluant were sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting peptide ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 120,000 and were scanned between m/z 380-1500 Da. Data dependent MS/MS scans (Top Speed) were employed to automatically isolate and fragment precursor ions by collision-induced dissociation (CID, Normalised Collision Energy (NCE): 35%) which were analysed in the linear ion trap. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion window of 70 seconds was employed. The top 10 most abundant fragment ions from each MS/MS event were then selected for a further stage of fragmentation by Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) MS3 (1) in the HCD high energy collision cell using HCD (High energy Collisional Dissociation, NCE: 65%). The m/z values and relative abundances of each reporter ion and all fragments (mass range from 100-500 Da) in each MS3 step were measured in the Orbitrap analyser, which was set at a resolution of 60,000.  This was performed in cycles of 10 MS3 events before the Lumos instrument reverted to scanning the m/z ratios of the intact peptide ions and the cycle continued.

### Data Protocol
We processed .RAW data files using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Mascot (Matrix Science) v2.6. We searched raw files iteratively against custom proteomes for each species; D. americana (77209 entries), D. novamexicana (140262 entries), and D. virilis (183293 entries) and the common repository of contaminant proteins (cRAP, 125 sequences). We specified trypsin as enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage, 16-plex TMTpro and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications. We used Percolator to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) and applied stringent thresholds for peptide (FDR < 0.01) and protein identification (FDR < 0.05). Protein identification allowed an MS tolerance of ± 10 ppm and an MS/MS tolerance of ± 0.8Da ppm along with permission of up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer on the 16 reporter ion intensities per peptide by calculating the sum of centroided reporter ions within a ± 2 millimass unit (mmu) window.

### Publication Abstract
Reproductive traits often evolve rapidly between species. Understanding the causes and consequences of this rapid divergence requires characterization of female and male reproductive proteins and their effect on fertilization success. Species in the Drosophila virilis clade exhibit rampant interspecific reproductive incompatibilities, making them ideal for studies on diversification of reproductive proteins and their role in speciation. Importantly, the role of intraejaculate protein abundance and allocation in interspecific divergence is poorly understood. Here, we identify and quantify the transferred male ejaculate proteome using multiplexed isobaric labeling of the lower female reproductive tract before and immediately after mating using three species of the virilis group. We identified over 200 putative male ejaculate proteins, many of which show differential abundance between species, suggesting that males transfer a species-specific allocation of seminal fluid proteins during copulation. We also identified over 2000 female reproductive proteins, which contain female-specific serine-type endopeptidases that showed differential abundance between species and elevated rates of molecular evolution, similar to that of some male seminal fluid proteins. Our findings suggest that reproductive protein divergence can also manifest in terms of species-specific protein abundance patterns.

### Keywords
Drosophila novamexicana, Drosophila americana, Seminal fluid proteins, Reproductive isolation, Sperm, Female reproductive tract, Tmt, Postmating prezygotic isolation, Drosophila virilis

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Department of Biology, Syracuse University, Syracuse NY, 13244, USA

### Submitter
Martin Garlovsky

### Lab Head
Dr Yasir H. Ahmed-Braimah
Department of Biology, Syracuse University, Syracuse NY, 13244, USA


