### Accession
PXD034430

### Title
Redox regulation of cytosolic translation in rice during fungal infection identified by quantitative proteomics

### Description
Pathogen attack can increase plant levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which then act as signaling molecules activating plant defense. Elucidating these processes is crucial to understanding the redox signaling pathways in plant defense responses. By an iodo TMT–based quantitative proteomic approach, we mapped 4,292 oxidized cysteine sites in 2,808 proteins in rice leaves. Oxidized proteins were involved in gene expression, peptide biosynthetic processes, stress responses, ROS metabolic processes, and translation pathways. Magnaporthe oryzae infection led to increased oxidation modification levels of 531 cysteine sites in 454 proteins, including many transcriptional regulators and ribosomal proteins. Ribo-seq analysis revealed that the oxidation modification of ribosomal proteins promoted the translational efficiency of many mRNAs involved in defense response pathways, thereby affecting rice immunity. Our results suggest that increased oxidative modification of ribosomal proteins in rice leaves promotes cytosolic translation, revealing a novel function of post-translational modifications. Furthermore, Wthee identified oxidation-sensitive  plant proteins, which identified here provided a valuable research resource of research on protein redox regulation and could guide future mechanistic studies. Our results suggest that increased oxidative modification of ribosomal proteins in rice leaves promotes cytosolic translation, revealing a novel function of post-translational modifications.

### Sample Protocol
The M. oryzae strain P131 was used for pathogenicity assays. Rice (japonica cultivar: Lijiangxintuanheigu) seedlings at the fifth-leaf stage were sprayed with M. oryzae P131 conidial suspensions (5 × 104 conidia mL-1) mixed with 0.25% Tween 20, and samples were collected at 24 hours post-inoculation (hpi). Rice plants injected with water served as controls. Control rice leaves (Mock) and infected rice leaves (Infection) were collected sampled and used for proteome, oxidome, transcriptome (RNA-seq) analyses, and translatome (Ribo-seq) analyses. Frozen leaf samples were ground to a fine powder using liquid nitrogen, and then 4 volumes (compared to the volume of powder) of lysis buffer (0.15 M NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 0.02 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, and 1% protease inhibitor) was added. The samples were lysed ultrasonically. An equal volume of Tris-phenol was added and the samples were centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. Protein was precipitated from the supernatant with 0.1 M ammonium acetate/methanol (five times the volume of supernatant) overnight. Protein pellets were washed with methanol and acetone, and the final pellet was reconstituted with 1% SDS. Protein concentrations were determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kit, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Proteins were digested according to a previously described procedure (Chen et al., 2021). First, the samples were enzymatically digested trypsin overnight at 37°C using a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio, followed by another 4 h digestion using a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio. The resulting peptide solution was acidified with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalinated using a SepPak C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA), and then vacuum dried. Peptides were reduced using 10 mM DTT and simultaneously alkylated with 20 mM IAM for 45 min at room temperature in darkness, and the urea concentration was then adjusted to below 2 M using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Iodo TMT labelling was performed using a TMT Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), following the manufacturer’s protocol. For total cysteine labelling, each sample (100 μg, 1 μg/μL) was reduced for 1 h at 37°C using 10 mM TCEP and then alkylated with 0.9 mM iodo TMT. Iodo TMT labelling for all samples continued for 2 h with occasional shaking at 37°C. Then, 500 mM DTT was added to quench the reaction, and samples were incubated for 15 min, pooled, and precipitated with 4 volumes of chilled acetone overnight at 20°C. The resulting pellets were washed three times with ice cold acetone to remove excess iodo TMT reagents and dissolved in a buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0).  The tryptic peptides generated above were fractionated by high-pH reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 130 Å, 4.6 × 250 mm). The peptides were then combined into six fractions and vacuum dried. For affinity enrichment, anti-TMT Resin (100 μL/100 μg peptide) was washed three times with 1× Tris-buffered saline (TBS) and incubated with peptides for 2 h at room temperature or overnight at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, and the resin was washed five times with TBS and then three times with 1 column volume of water each time. Peptides were eluted using 4 column volumes of TMT elution buffer (40% acetonitrile; 5% TFA) and lyophilized. The eluted peptides were desalted with a C18 ZipTip pipette tip (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA) for high-performance liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC−MS/MS) analysis. The peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile) and separated using an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile. The following liquid phase gradient setting was used: 0–38 min, 8–23% B; 38–52 min, 23–35% B; 52–56 min, 35–80% B; 56–60 min, 80% B. The flow rate was maintained at 500 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were searched with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) against the UniProt Oryza sativa subsp. japonica database (48,932 protein sequences). Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme and a maximum of two missing cleavage sites was allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for peptides, proteins and modification sites were less than 1%. Oxidized peptides were considered as false positives and removed from our list when the peptides were identified from reverse or contaminant protein sequences, when peptides had a score below 40, when the site localization probability was < 0.75, or when the oxidized sites mapped to the C terminus of the peptide, unless the peptide C terminus was the end of the corresponding protein. To calculate p values of differentially expressed or oxidized proteins between Mock and Infection samples, unique peptide quantitative values were log2 transformed and two-sample two-tailed Student's t-tests were used to calculate p values. Proteins with a p value of < 0.05 and expression ratio of > 1.5 were regarded as upregulated, while proteins with a p value of < 0.05 and expression ratio of < 1/1.5 were regarded as downregulated.

### Publication Abstract
Pathogen attack can increase plant levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which act as signaling molecules to activate plant defense mechanisms. Elucidating these processes is crucial for understanding redox signaling pathways in plant defense responses. Using an iodo-tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics approach, we mapped 3362 oxidized cysteine sites in 2275 proteins in rice leaves. Oxidized proteins were involved in gene expression, peptide biosynthetic processes, stress responses, ROS metabolic processes, and translation pathways. Magnaporthe oryzae infection led to increased oxidative modification levels of 512 cysteine sites in 438 proteins, including many transcriptional regulators and ribosomal proteins. Ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq) analysis revealed that the oxidative modification of ribosomal proteins promoted the translational efficiency of many mRNAs involved in defense response pathways, thereby affecting rice immunity. Our results suggest that increased oxidative modification of ribosomal proteins in rice leaves promotes cytosolic translation, thus revealing a novel function of post-translational modifications. Furthermore, the oxidation-sensitive proteins identified here provide a valuable resource for research on protein redox regulation and can guide future mechanistic studies.

### Keywords
Ros; protein oxidation; translation; infection; immunity; rice

### Affiliations
The Key Lab of Plant Pathology of Hubei Province, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China

### Submitter
Xiaoyang  Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoyang Chen
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China


