### Accession
PXD030380

### Title
Proteomic dynamics in response to iron deficiency and hypoxia

### Description
Iron and oxygen deficiencies are common features in pathophysiological conditions such as is-chemia, neurological diseases, and cancer. Cellular adaptive responses to such deficiencies include repression of mitochondrial respiration as well as promotion of angiogenesis and cell cycle con-trol. We applied a systematic proteomics analysis to determine the global proteomic changes caused by acute hypoxia, chronic and acute iron deficiency (ID) in hippocampal neuronal cells. Our analysis identified over 8600 proteins, revealing similar and differential effects of each treatment on activation and inhibition of pathways regulating neuronal development. In addition, com-parative analysis of ID-induced proteomics changes in cultured cells and transcriptomic changes in the rat hippocampus identified common altered pathways, indicating specific neuronal effects. Taken together, our study identified diverse signaling networks that were differentially regulated by hypoxia and ID in neuronal cells.

### Sample Protocol
HT22 cells were cultured in SILAC media and treated with 1% O2 for 6hrs, 100uM DFO for 6hrs and 10 uM DFO for 24 hrs. Proteins were fractionated and digested with trypsin. Proteins were identified by high resolution Orbitrap LCMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were quantified by Maxquant software. Bioinformatic analysis were performed to reveal significantly regulated pathways in response to hypoxia, acute iron deficiency and chronic iron deficiency. Proteomics quantification analysis was compared with gene expression analysis in iron deficiency rat hippocampus tissue. Transcription factor enrichment analysis was performed to reveal hyperactivated transcription pathways in response to iron deficiency in both neuronal cells and tissue.

### Publication Abstract
Iron and oxygen deficiencies are common features in pathophysiological conditions, such as ischemia, neurological diseases, and cancer. Cellular adaptive responses to such deficiencies include repression of mitochondrial respiration, promotion of angiogenesis, and cell cycle control. We applied a systematic proteomics analysis to determine the global proteomic changes caused by acute hypoxia and chronic and acute iron deficiency (ID) in hippocampal neuronal cells. Our analysis identified over 8600 proteins, revealing similar and differential effects of each treatment on activation and inhibition of pathways regulating neuronal development. In addition, comparative analysis of ID-induced proteomics changes in cultured cells and transcriptomic changes in the rat hippocampus identified common altered pathways, indicating specific neuronal effects. Transcription factor enrichment and correlation analysis identified key transcription factors that were activated in both cultured cells and tissue by iron deficiency, including those implicated in iron regulation, such as HIF1, NFY, and NRF1. We further identified MEF2 as a novel transcription factor whose activity was induced by ID in both HT22 proteome and rat hippocampal transcriptome, thus linking iron deficiency to MEF2-dependent cellular signaling pathways in neuronal development. Taken together, our study results identified diverse signaling networks that were differentially regulated by hypoxia and ID in neuronal cells.

### Keywords
Neu-ronal cells, Transcriptome analysis, Oxygen sensing, Quantitative proteomics, Hypoxia, Iron deficiency, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota at Twin Cities

### Submitter
Yue Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yue Chen
University of Minnesota at Twin Cities


