### Accession
PXD021309

### Title
CD209L/L-SIGN N-Glycosylation and N-Glycosylation Site Occupancy

### Description
CD209L is a membrane glycoprotein with known glycan-binding properties and it also contains 2 N-glycosylation sequons at sites N92 and N361. Treatment with PNGase F in the presence of H218O, which removes N-linked glycans and isotopically labels the formerly-glycosylated site, confirmed that both unmodified and formerly-glycosylated versions of the peptide spanning the N92 N-glycosylated sequon were present. This suggests that a portion of CD209L protein is N-glycosylated at site N92. nUPLC-MS/MS analyses of CD209L digests enabled detection of a glycopeptide consistent with high-mannose type N-linked glycosylation.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analyses, myc-tagged CD209L was immunoprecipitated from HEK/CD209L lysates using Pierce Anti-c-Myc magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Following elution, CD209L was treated with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:20. Following the digestion with trypsin, half of the sample was additionally digested with endoproteinase AspN (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:20 according to the supplier’s protocol. Peptides from tryptic and trypsin-AspN digests were then divided in half. Half of the sample was treated with PNGase F (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) in the presence of H218O (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Tewksbury, MA, USA) while the second half of the sample was reserved for glycopeptide analyses. Peptides were desalted using 0.6 µL C18 ZipTips (Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA, USA) prior to mass spectrometry analysis. nUPLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Fusion Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system (Waters) and a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion). For chromatographic separation, a nanoEase Symmetry C18 UPLC Trap Column (100 Å, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm, Waters) was used for trapping, and a nanoEase MZ HSS C18 T3 UPLC Column (100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 100 mm, Waters) was used for separation. The peptide trapping and separation were performed as described above for peptide/glycopeptide analysis. The peptide trapping step was performed at 4 μL/min for 4 min with 1% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (Solvent A). Following the trapping step, peptides were separated on the analytical column according to the following conditions: 0–1 min: 2% B, 1–3 min: 2–5% B, 3–43 min: 5–40% B (Solvent B: 99% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). All analyses were performed in positive mode, with the RF lens set to 30%. MS scans were acquired with the following settings: 120,000 resolution @ m/z 400, scan range m/z 350–2000, 1 μscan/MS, AGC target 1 x 106, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. For HCD analyses, initial MS2 scans (35% collision energy) were acquired with the following settings: 15,000 resolution @ m/z 400, scan range m/z 100–2000, 1 μscan/MS, AGC target 1 x 106, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Based on the initial HCD (35%) MS2 scans, a second fragmentation step was triggered if at least two glycopeptide oxonium ions were detected (at m/z 204.0867, HexNAc; m/z 138.0545, HexNAc – CH6O3; and m/z 366.1396, HexNAc1Hex1) within a 15-ppm mass tolerance. This second product ion-triggered MS2 spectrum (15/25/35% collision energy) was acquired with the following settings: 30,000 resolution @ m/z 400, scan range m/z 100–2000, 1 μscan/MS, AGC target 1 x 106, and a maximum injection time of 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were interpreted using Mascot search algorithm, with the Uniprot (Human) protein database. Glycopeptide spectra were assigned manually.

### Publication Abstract
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to spread, investigating the processes underlying the interactions between SARS-CoV-2 and its hosts is of high importance. Here, we report the identification of CD209L/L-SIGN and the related protein CD209/DC-SIGN as receptors capable of mediating SARS-CoV-2 entry into human cells. Immunofluorescence staining of human tissues revealed prominent expression of CD209L in the lung and kidney epithelia and endothelia. Multiple biochemical assays using a purified recombinant SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain (S-RBD) or S1 encompassing both N termal domain and RBD and ectopically expressed CD209L and CD209 revealed that CD209L and CD209 interact with S-RBD. CD209L contains two <i>N</i>-glycosylation sequons, at sites N92 and N361, but we determined that only site N92 is occupied. Removal of the <i>N</i>-glycosylation at this site enhances the binding of S-RBD with CD209L. CD209L also interacts with ACE2, suggesting a role for heterodimerization of CD209L and ACE2 in SARS-CoV-2 entry and infection in cell types where both are present. Furthermore, we demonstrate that human endothelial cells are permissive to SARS-CoV-2 infection, and interference with CD209L activity by a knockdown strategy or with soluble CD209L inhibits virus entry. Our observations demonstrate that CD209L and CD209 serve as alternative receptors for SARS-CoV-2 in disease-relevant cell types, including the vascular system. This property is particularly important in tissues where ACE2 has low expression or is absent and may have implications for antiviral drug development.

### Keywords
Human cd209l, Dc-sign, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Boston University School of Medicine
William Fairfield Warren Distinguished Professor Depts. Of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Chemistry Boston University School of Medicine Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Kevin Chandler

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine E Costello
William Fairfield Warren Distinguished Professor Depts. Of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Chemistry Boston University School of Medicine Boston, MA, USA


