### Accession
PXD041763

### Title
HEK293T cells were transfected with Flag-tagged NLRP3 treated with or without nigericin (10 μM, 1 h).

### Description
In order to identificate NLRP3 acetylation, we utilized an acetylproteomic approach to identify the acetylation sites within NLRP3. We first reconstituted the NLRP3 inflammasome in HEK293T cells by co-transfected with plasmids encoding NLRP3, ASC, Caspase-1 and Pro-IL-1β, then stimulated the genetically modified cells with nigericin.Flag-tagged NLRP3 was immunoprecipitated and analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with Flag-tagged NLRP3 treated with or without nigericin (10 μM, 1 h). Then the cells were lysed in IP buffer (1% (v/v) Nonidet P-40, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 50 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl) contained with a protease inhibitor cocktail. Cell extracts were centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4℃ and the supernatants were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 beads (Sigma), and then dissolved in SDS loading buffer. Samples were denatured at 95℃ for 10 min before SDS-PAGE. NLRP3 in gel was digested with trypsin, and subjected to LC/tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis in Jingjie PTM Biolab Co. Ltd. (Hangzhou,China). Briefly, the peptides were analyzed using Q ExactiveTM Plus mass spectrometry (Thermo) coupled to an ekspert EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the protein sequence of NLRP3. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragmentations. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met and acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set at high, and peptide ion score was set > 20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek293tcells， nlrp3

### Affiliations
the Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University
 the Third Xiangya Hospital

### Submitter
Kai Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Zhao
the Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University


