### Accession
PXD033125

### Title
GRAMD1C regulates autophagy initiation and mitochondrial bioenergetics

### Description
During autophagy, cytosolic cargo is sequestered into double-membrane vesicles called autophagosomes. The origin and identity of the membranes that form the autophagosome remain to be fully characterized. Here, we investigated the role of cholesterol in starvation-induced autophagy and identify a role for the ER-localized cholesterol transport protein GRAMD1C in the regulation of autophagy and mitochondrial function. We demonstrate that cholesterol depletion leads to a rapid induction of autophagy and a corresponding increased abundance of curved autophagy membranes. We further show that GRAMD1C is a negative regulator of starvation-induced autophagy. Similar to its yeast orthologue, GRAMD1C is recruited to mitochondria through its GRAM domain. Additionally, we find that GRAMD1C depletion leads to increased mitochondrial cholesterol accumulation and mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. Finally, we demonstrate that expression of GRAM family genes is linked to clear cell renal carcinoma survival, highlighting the pathophysiological relevance of cholesterol transport proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing GRAMD1C-EGFP or GRAMD1C(ΔGRAM)-EGFP were lysed with NP-40 lysis buffer (150 mM, 1.0% NP-40, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) supplemented with PhosStop phosphatase inhibitor (Sigma) and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Co-immunopurification was then carried out using EGFP-TRAP (Chromotek) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting beads with the coprecipitated proteins were washed twice with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins on beads were reduced and alkylated and further digested by trypsin for overnight at 37 ºC .  The resulting peptide samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using EvoSepOne coupled to QExactive HF (Thermo) using the 15 samples/day method.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software version 2.0.1.0 for protein identification and label free quantification. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-term), carbamyl (N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation was employed with default settings. The UniProt human reviewed database from 2020 was used for the database searches.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mbcd, Gramd1c, Gram, Autophagy, Cholesterol

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


