### Accession
PXD019882

### Title
Phactr1/PP1 phosphatase substrates in mouse primary neurons

### Description
Neurons express Phactr1 at high level (Allen et al., 2004), and Phactr1 mutations are associated with morphological and functional developmental defects in cortical neurons (Hamada et al., 2018). To identify targets of the Phactr1/PP1 phosphatase holoenzyme, we cultured hippocampal and cortical neurons from wildtype and Phactr1-null animals, treated them either with Latrunculin B or Cytochalasin D to inhibit or activate formation of the Phactr1/PP1 complex (Wiezlak et al., 2012), and analysed phosphorylation profiles using TMT phosphoproteomics. Among over 9000 phosphorylation sites quantified, we found numerous phosphorylation sites that differed significantly in their response to these stimuli in wildtype as opposed to Phactr1-null neurons.

### Sample Protocol
Two pairs of Phactr1+/- mice were crossed. Hippocampal and cortical tissue from 15 embryos was extracted on day E16.5 and plated in 12-well plate dishes. Hippocampal and cortical neurons in two biological replicates each corresponding to Phactr1+/+ (WT) or Phactr1-/- (KO) genotypes were kept for further experiment. On DIV10, neurons were treated with DMSO, CD (10 μM) or LatB (1 μM) for 30 minutes. Cells were lysed using fresh lysis buffer (urea, 8 M; HEPES pH 8.2, 50 mM; glycerol 2 phosphate, 10 mM; NaF, 50 mM; sodium pyrophosphate, 5 mM; EDTA, 1 mM; sodium vanadate, 1 mM; DTT, 1 mM; protease inhibitor cocktail, 1:25; phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, 1:100; Okadaic acid, 500 nM). Samples were incubated on ice for 30 min, centrifuged at 14000 g for 10 min and the supernatants were collected. Samples were incubated dithiothreitol (5 mM) for 25 min at 56C. Then iodoacetamide was added to 10 mM and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Dithiothreitol was added to quench the alkylation reaction. The mixture was diluted with 50mM HEPES pH 8.5. The samples were incubated with rLysC at 37C for 2 h and then with trypsin at 37C overnight. TFA was added to 1% of the mixture volume and samples were cleared using C18 MacroSpin columns from Nest Group according to manufacturer’s protocol. The samples were dried and resuspended in 50 mM HEPES. Tandem Mass Tag 10plex isobaric reagent kit from Thermo was used according to manufacturer’s protocol for isobaric labelling. Two 10plex mixtures were pooled for cortical and for hippocampal neurons. The TMT mixtures were then cleared using C18 SepPak Lite column from Waters according to manufacturer’s protocol and then dried. Phosphopeptides were enriched using two sequential procedures. First, High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit from Thermo was used according to manufacturer’s protocol. Eluted phosphopeptides were collected and dried in speedvac. The flow-through was dried in speedvac, resuspended and enriched using High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit from Thermo according to manufacturer’s protocol. The phosphopeptides were collected and dried in speedvac. Enriched phosphopeptides from both procedures were dissolved in aqueous 2% TFA and combined. Pierce High pH Reversed Phase Fractionation Kit 84868 was used according to manufacturer’s protocol to separate samples into eight fractions each. The eluates were dried.  TMT labelled phosphopeptide fractions were re-suspend in aqueous 0.1% TFA. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm, 75 μm I.D. Pepmap column over a 3 h gradient and eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos) operated with Xcalibur software. Each sample was be measured twice, in MS2 and MS3 modes. The instrument was setup for data-dependent acquisition mode with top 10 most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS by HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) for peptide and protein identification; the database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine against the Mus musculus canonical sequences from UniProtKB. Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications set as Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Phospho (STY). The estimated false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and site levels. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Reporter ion MS2 or Reporter ion MS3 was appropriately selected for each raw file.  The resulting phosphorylation sites tables were imported into Perseus (v1.6.1.2) for data analysis. Contaminants and reverse peptides were cleaned up from the Phosphosites (STY) and the values normalised using Z-score function across columns. Cortical/ hippocampal as well as MS2/MS3 data across two biological replicates were pooled. (DMSO   CD) differences were calculated and compared between Phactr1 WT and KO neurons using two-sample t-test. Phosphorylation sites with significantly different dephosphorylation upon CD treatment in WT neurons than in KO neurons were determined to be targets of Phactr1-dependent dephosphorylation.

### Publication Abstract
PPP-family phosphatases such as PP1 have little intrinsic specificity. Cofactors can target PP1 to substrates or subcellular locations, but it remains unclear how they might confer sequence-specificity on PP1. The cytoskeletal regulator Phactr1 is a neuronally enriched PP1 cofactor that is controlled by G-actin. Structural analysis showed that Phactr1 binding remodels PP1's hydrophobic groove, creating a new composite surface adjacent to the catalytic site. Using phosphoproteomics, we identified mouse fibroblast and neuronal Phactr1/PP1 substrates, which include cytoskeletal components and regulators. We determined high-resolution structures of Phactr1/PP1 bound to the dephosphorylated forms of its substrates IRSp53 and spectrin &#x3b1;II. Inversion of the phosphate in these holoenzyme-product complexes supports the proposed PPP-family catalytic mechanism. Substrate sequences C-terminal to the dephosphorylation site make intimate contacts with the composite Phactr1/PP1 surface, which are required for efficient dephosphorylation. Sequence specificity explains why Phactr1/PP1 exhibits orders-of-magnitude enhanced reactivity towards its substrates, compared to apo-PP1 or other PP1 holoenzymes.

### Keywords
Mouse, Neurons, Phactr1, Phosphatase

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Director of Research Head, Signalling and Transcription Group The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road, London NW11AT, UK

### Submitter
Roman Fedoryshchak

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Treisman
Director of Research Head, Signalling and Transcription Group The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road, London NW11AT, UK


