### Accession
PXD020495

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of PVY-infected potato plants at normal and elevated temperature

### Description
To explore the underlying mechanisms that lead to increased susceptibility of potato cultivar Chicago to PVY at elevated (28°C) temperature compared with normal conditions (22°C), iTRAQ-based quantitative comparative proteomic analysis was conducted at 8 and 14 dpi

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted by phenol extraction method (Faurobert et al., 2007). Plant tissue was homogenized in ice-cold extraction buffer (500 m Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 50 mM EDTA, 700 mM sucrose, 100 mM КCl, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 mM DTT), followed by 10 min incubation on ice. An equal volume of ice-cold Tris–HCl (pH 8.0)-saturated phenol was added, and the mixture was vortexed and incubated for 10 min with shaking. After centrifugation (10 min, 5500 × g, 4°C), the phenol phase was collected and re-extracted with extraction buffer. Proteins were precipitated from the final phenol phase with three volumes of ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol overnight at −20°C. The pellets were rinsed with ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol three times and with ice-cold acetone once and then dried. Resulting pellet dissolved in 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 10 mM Tris. Proteins were quantified by Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA USA). The 100 µg of proteins were reduced by 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 50°C and alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature. Proteins were dissolved in five times in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested by 1 ug sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37 ˚C overnight. Reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to 1%. 20 µg of each sample was desalted by Empore octadecyl C18 extraction disks (Supelco, USA) and then was dried in a vacuum concentrator.  iTRAQ labelling (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) was conducted according to manufacturer’s manual. Proteins were labeled with the iTRAQ tags as follows: Mock 22 – 116, 117, 118 isobaric tags, PVY 22  – 113, 114, 117 and PVY 28 – 113, 114, 115 isobaric tags for 8 dpi; Mock 22 – 113, 114, 115 isobaric tags, PVY 22 and PVY 28 – 116, 117, 121 isobaric tags for 14 dpi. The labeled peptides were mixed, cleanup by SCX membranes and then vacuum dried.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were analyzed by PEAKS Studio version 8.0 software (Bioinfor Inc., CA, USA). The custom database was built from Phytozome database Solanum tuberosum combined with chloroplast and mitochondrial proteins (39,809 records). The database search was performed with the following parameters: a fragmentation mass tolerance of 0.05 Da; parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm; fixed modification – carbamidomethylation; variable modifications -  oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), and acetylation (Protein N-term). The results were filtered by a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PEAKS Q was used for iTRAQ quantification. Normalization was performed by averaging the abundance of all peptides. Median values were used for averaging. Differentially expressed proteins were filtered if their fold change was greater than 1.2 and significance threshold 15. contained two unique peptides with a statistical P-value (ANOVA test with Benjamini and Hochberg FDR correction) below 0.05, variance homogeneity test (P-value > 0.05), and normal distribution test (P-value > 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Plant-virus interactions are greatly influenced by environmental factors such as temperatures. In virus-infected plants, enhanced temperature is frequently associated with more severe symptoms and higher virus content. However, the mechanisms involved in such regulatory effects remain largely uncharacterized. To provide more insight into the mechanisms whereby temperature regulates plant-virus interactions, we analysed changes in the proteome of potato cv. Chicago plants infected with potato virus Y (PVY) at normal (22&#xa0;&#xb0;C) and elevated temperature (28&#xa0;&#xb0;C), which is known to significantly increase plant susceptibility to the virus. One of the most intriguing findings is that the main enzymes of the methionine cycle (MTC) were down-regulated at the higher but not at normal temperatures. With good agreement, we found that higher temperature conditions triggered consistent and concerted changes in the level of MTC metabolites, suggesting that the enhanced susceptibility of potato plants to PVY at 28&#xa0;&#xb0;C may at least be partially orchestrated by the down-regulation of MTC enzymes and concomitant cycle perturbation. In line with this, foliar treatment of these plants with methionine restored accumulation of MTC metabolites and subverted the susceptibility to PVY at elevated temperature. These data are discussed in the context of the major function of the MTC in transmethylation processes.

### Keywords
Potato, Solanum tuberosum, Itraq

### Affiliations
IBCH RAS

### Submitter
Igor Fesenko

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Taliansky
IBCH RAS


