### Accession
PXD024833

### Title
Identification of the interaction proteins of PRSS37 by GFP-IP/MS using testis proteins from PRSS37-EGFP knock-in mice and pAcr-EGFP transgenic mice

### Description
To identify the potential interaction partners of PRSS37, three testis lysates of Prss37E/+ mice (PRSS37-EGFP knock-in heterozygous mice) and three testis lysates of pAcr-EGFP transgenic mice were immunoprecipitated using anti-GFP mAb magnetic beads.  The GFP-IP products of six samples from two groups were subsequently analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS) to identify differentially immmunoprecipitated proteins (DIPs) in the PRSS37-EGFP group. Proteins detected in pAcr-EGFP group were used as negative controls to exclude the endogenous proteins and polypeptides that interact nonspecifically with the anti-GFP mAb magnetic beads.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse testicular cells were solubilized with 1 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 6 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 1% protease inhibitor and 1% phosphatase inhibitor (Roche) mixture for 30 min on ice. The lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. 1 mg of testis protein was incubated with 50 μl anti-GFP mAb magnetic beads (MBL) overnight at 4°C. Samples were applied to columns in the magnetic field of the Millipore separator, and the columns were then rinsed five times with 1 ml of the wash buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 6 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40 and 1 mM PMSF). Each of beads was added 50 μl eluent (2.5% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and heated at 95°C for 10 min. The eluent was retained and the beads were treated again with another 50 μl eluent and then the two eluents were merged. The proteins were precipitated by trichloroacetic acid and cleaned with acetone, dried at room temperature for 30 min, and dissolved in 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl solution (pH 8.0). After centrifugation at 12,000 g for 15 min, the supernatants were obtained. The reduction reaction was carried out by adding dithiothreitol to the final concentration of 10 mM and incubated at 37°C for 1 hr to open the disulfide-bond, and alkylation was carried out by adding iodoacetamide to the final concentration of 40 mM and incubated at room temperature as well as in darkness to seal the sulfhydryl group. An appropriate volume of 100 mM Tris-HCl solution (pH 8.0) was added to dilute the urea to a concentration of less than 2 M, and 1 μg trypsin was added and incubated at 37°C for overnight digestion. The enzyme digestion was terminated by adding trifluoroacetic acid and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min. The peptides were desalted, drained and stored at -20°C for machine testing. MS identification was performed using Triple TOF 5600 liquid-mass system (SCIEX, USA). The peptide samples were inhaled through autosampler and bonded to a C18 capture column, then eluted to an analytical column for separation. Two mobile phases were employed to establish the analysis gradient for 90 min, and the flow rate of the liquid phase was set at 300 nL/min. For IDA-MS mode analysis, each scan cycle consisted of an MS full scan followed by 40 MS/MS scans. In the process of MS identification, we carried out quality controls from three aspects including peptide mass deviation, peptide length, and peptide missed cleavage quantity. The mass deviation distribution of peptide was within ± 20 PPM and it was less than 20 parts per million, demonstrating that MS detection accuracy was well. Most of the peptide lengths were distributed between 8-20 amino acid residues, which were consistent with the trypsin digestion rule and conducted to MS detection. The majority of peptides have no leakage sites whereas a small proportion of peptides have one or two leakage sites, showing that enzyme digestion was sufficient and the sample preparation reached the standard.

### Data Protocol
The MS data generated by Triple TOF 5600 were retrieved by ProteinPilot. Paragon was used as the algorithm of retrieval. The database of retrieval was used a proteome reference database for mice in UniProt, and the retrieved results were filtrated based on the protein score ≥ 1.3. Removing the retrieved items in the reverse library, and the remaining information will be used for follow-up analysis. To convenient statistical analysis and reduce false positive results caused by identification of low abundance protein, the data with a spectral number of 0 was artificially filled with 1. The ratio of protein spectral number (Ratio) and the double sample equal variance T test significance (P-value) were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prss37-egfp knock-in mice, Testis, Gfp-immunoprecipitation, Mouse, Prss37, Differentially immunoprecipitated proteins, Pacr-egfp transgenic mice

### Affiliations
Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Chunling Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Zhugang Wang
Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine


