### Accession
PXD040685

### Title
An unexpected histone-binding activity for the MIER1 histone deacetylase complex suggests a potential chaperone function.

### Description
Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) serve as the catalytic subunit of six distinct families of nuclear complexes. These complexes repress gene transcription through removing acetyl groups from lysine residues in histone tails. In addition to the deacetylase subunit, these complexes typically contain transcription factor and/or chromatin binding activities. The MIER:HDAC complex has hitherto been poorly characterized. Here we show that MIER1 unexpectedly co-purifies with an H2A:H2B histone dimer. We show that MIER1 is also able to bind a complete histone octamer. Intriguingly, we found that a larger MIER1:HDAC1:BAHD1:C1QBP complex additionally co-purifies with an intact nucleosome on which H3K27 is either di- or tri-methylated. Together this suggests that the MIER1 complex acts downstream of PRC2 to expand regions of repressed chromatin and could potentially deposit histone octamer onto nucleosome-depleted regions of DNA.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis Propionylation of histones and in-gel digestion Gel bands were derivatised according to (44, 45)with some modifications. Briefly, 50 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the gel pieces and incubated with 16.6 µl of propionylation reagent (1:3 v/v propionic anhydride in acetonitrile) for 15 minutes at 37°C with agitation in a thermomixer at 900 rpm (Eppendorf, UK). The supernatant was then removed and the derivatisation process was repeated. After discarding the supernatant, the gel was de-stained, and proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hour at 55°C and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Protein in the gel was digested with 100 µl of trypsin (0.02 µg/µl) at 37oC overnight. Peptides were then extracted twice with 100 µl of 3.5% formic acid in 30% ACN then followed by 5% formic acid in 50% ACN. Eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -20 °C until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.6.10 (46). Data were searched against a human UniProt reference proteome (downloaded June 2019) using the following search parameters for standard protein identification: enzyme set to Trypsin/P (2 mis-cleavages), methionine oxidation and N‐terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. For histone PTM analysis the following settings were used: enzyme set to Trypsin/P with up to 5 missed cleavages, methionine oxidation, lysine propionylation, lysine acetylation, lysine mono, di and tri-methylation were set as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. A protein FDR of 0.01 and a peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for identification level cut‐offs based on a decoy database searching strategy.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deacetylase, Methylation, Histone

### Affiliations
University of Sheffield
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield.

### Submitter
Mark Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Collins
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield.


