### Accession
PXD006463

### Title
Involvement of serum-derived exosomes of patients with low bone density in progressive failure of bone remodeling via alteration of intercellular signal transduction and integrin-mediated mechanosensation

### Description
Exosomes are secreted into the blood by various types of cells. These small vesicles are involved in bone remodeling by mediation of intercellular communication in osteoblasts, osteoclasts or their precursors. Alterations in exosomal proteins are related to the failure of bone remodeling, which results in progressive loss of bone mass and poor quality of bone structure. However, the molecular changes in serum-derived exosomes (SDEs) from patients with low bone density and their functions in bone remodeling remain to be fully elucidated. We present a quantitative proteomics analysis of exosomes purified from the serum of patients with osteoporosis/osteopenia and normal volunteers; these data are available via Proteome Xchange with the identifier PXDXXXXX. Overall, 1,371 proteins were identified with an overlap of 1,160 Gene IDs among the ExoCarta proteins. In vitro studies and bioinformatics analysis revealed that the main changes in the SDEs of osteoporosis patients were proteins playing critical roles in integrins-mediated mechanosensation and signaling cascades, which are implicated in aggravating the failure of bone remodeling, including the enhancement of osteoclast differentiation and inhibition of bone mineralization. In contrast, the main changes in SDEs of osteopenia patients were proteins known to facilitate both osteoclast differentiation and osteoblastic bone formation, which resulted in a compensatory elevation of bone remodeling. In addition, bioinformatics analysis indicated that SDEs from elderly volunteers mediate negative regulation of bone remodeling via selenium deficiency-associated oxidative stress. This information will be helpful in elucidating the pathophysiological functions of SDEs and aid in the development of osteoporosis diagnostics and therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of exosomes from human serum Exosomes were isolated from pooled serum samples belonging to different groups by ultracentrifugation and using the Total Exosome Isolation Reagent as previously reported. In brief, serum was first diluted with an equal volume of PBS. For ultracentrifugation, the diluted serum was centrifuged at 10,000 ×g for 30 min at 4°C followed by ultracentrifugation at 110,000 ×g at 4°C for 90 min using a Beckman Optima L-100XP Ultracentrifuge. The pellet was washed with 1 mL PBS and then dissolved with 40 µL 8 M urea (11). The protein concentration was measured with a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). For exosome isolation, 0.2 volumes of the Total Exosome Isolation Reagent were added to diluted serum and vortexed for 30 s prior to incubation at 4°C for 30 min. The sample was then centrifuged at 10,000 ×g for 10 min at room temperature to pellet the exosomes. For osteoclastogenesis and bone formation assays, the exosome-enriched pellet was resuspended with PBS at a ratio of 25 μL PBS per 100 μL serum. The exosome suspension was lysed with RIPA lysis buffer and protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay kit. Tandem Mass Tag labeling Labeling was performed using the Tandem Mass Tagging (TMT) Kit following the manufacturer’s protocol with slight modifications. Equal amounts protein (100 µg) from four groups were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA). Protein digestion was completed by incubation with Trypsin/Lys-C at a mass ratio of 1:25 (enzyme: protein) for 12 h at 37°C following the manufacturer’s protocol. The digestion was terminated by heating at 60°C for 30 min. Digested proteins were then desalted, dried and finally dissolved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5). Different TM Tags were used to label the different groups: TMT-131 was used for the Osteoporosis patients group; TMT-130 for the Osteopenia group; TMT-127 for the Aged normal group; and TMT-126 for the Young normal group. After labeling, samples were pooled, desalted and dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation The TMT labeled peptides (100 μL in 0.1% TFA) were fractionated by HPLC (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Xbridge BEH300 C18 column maintained at 45°C. The peptides were eluted by a gradient acetonitrile elution buffer (pH 10) at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min. Each 1.5 mL elution was collected as one fraction. A total of 47 fractions were collected, dried and combined into 20 samples according to the peptide abundance. The samples were dissolved in 20 μL of 0.1% TFA for subsequent liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as previously described. Briefly, peptides were first passed through a homemade fused silica capillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C-18 resin (300 A, 5 μm; Varian, Lexington, MA) column on EASY-nLC 1000 system using gradient TFA elution buffer (pH 1–2) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The peptide eluate was ironed with a directly interfaced Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in positive-ion mode. Xcalibur 3.0 software was used for mass data acquisition in a data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
. Data analysis Proteins were identified using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) with the SEQUEST search engine. In detail, the raw MS data files were searched against the UniProt/SwissProt human proteome database (released on September 7, 2016). The following parameters were set as the search criteria: precursor mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.02 Da; total intensity threshold, 20,000; minimum number of peaks, 200; and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylation (on C) and TMT 6-plex (on K and the peptide N-terminus)(13) were set as static modifications, and oxidation (on M) was specified as a dynamic modification. Protein identification was considered valid if at least one peptide was statistically significant (P < 0.05 with a false discovery rate of 5%). The high-abundance serum proteins (albumin, IgG, antitrypsin, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin, fibrinogen, alpha2-macroglobulin, alpha1-acid glycoprotein, IgM, apolipoprotein AI, apolipoprotein AII, complement C3, and transthyretin) were removed from the protein list. Depletion of high-abundance proteins from the human proteomic sample protein quantification was performed using the TMT 6-plex method. Reporter monoisotopic m/z was tuned according to the raw spectral data. Proteins were quantified using unique peptides. Relative protein abundances are presented as the ratios to TMT-131/127, 130/127 and 127/126. The differential expression threshold was defined as a 2-fold change for both down- and upregulation of expression.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are secreted into the blood by various types of cells. These extracellular vesicles are involved in the contribution of exosomal proteins to osteoblastic or osteoclastic regulatory networks during the failure of bone remodeling, which results in age-related bone loss. However, the molecular changes in serum-derived exosomes (SDEs) from aged patients with low bone density and their functions in bone remodeling remain to be fully elucidated. We present a quantitative proteomics analysis of exosomes purified from the serum of the elderly patients with osteoporosis/osteopenia and normal volunteers; these data are available via Proteome Xchange with the identifier PXD006463. Overall, 1,371 proteins were identified with an overlap of 1,160 Gene IDs among the ExoCarta proteins. Bioinformatics analysis and in&#xa0;vitro studies suggested that protein changes in SDEs of osteoporosis patients are not only involved in suppressing the integrin-mediated mechanosensation and activation of osteoblastic cells, but also trigger the differentiation and resorption of osteoclasts. In contrast, the main changes in SDEs of osteopenia patients facilitated both activation of osteoclasts and formation of new bone mass, which could result in a compensatory elevation in bone remodeling. While the SDEs from aged normal volunteers might play a protective role in bone health through facilitating adhesion of bone cells and suppressing aging-associated oxidative stress. This information will be helpful in elucidating the pathophysiological functions of SDEs and aid in the development of senile osteoporosis diagnostics and therapeutics.

### Keywords
Osteoporosis, Integrin, Exosome, Osteoclast, Bone remodeling, Osteoblasts

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences


