### Accession
PXD024946

### Title
TRIM72 cross-linked by the higher-order assembly on the negatively charged liposome surface

### Description
Plasma membrane repair is a rapid cellular response for resealing of membrane for cell survival. In the early step of repair process, TRIM72 is known to a key initiator for facilitating patch membrane to the damaged membrane site. When acute membrane injury happens, TRIM72 is also known to sensitively generate disulfide bonds formations by reactive oxygen species and further oligomerize with each other. We tried to clarify this repair system using in vitro reconstruction of TRIM72-liposome complex and find critical sites using cross-linker mass spectrometry. Using each four different length of sulfhydryl reactive cross-linkers, TRIM72 cross-linked with each other on the negatively charged liposome surface only. We also identified that the cross-linking bridges were highly conserved except bismaleimidoethane as a shortest arm length about 8 Å only. Our results indicated that the B2-box/B2-box locates closely with each other on the liposome surface. Furthermore, freely open RING domain is rearranged into the specific conformation, where located near the H2 helix of coiled coil domain. It suggests that the conformational changes of TRIM72 are induced by higher order assembly on the negative charged membrane surface.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse TRIM72 was purified by E. coli BL21(DE3) cells with His6-MBP-tag. Cells were induced at optical density at 600 nm of 0.7 with 0.5 mM IPTG with 200 μM ZnCl2 at 18 °C for 18 h. Protein was purified by affinity chromatography followed ion-exchange and size exclusion chromatography. Liposomes were freshly prepared by sonication and extrusion method. 80 mol% DOPS and 20 mol% cholesterol were dissolved in chloroform or chloroform-methanol (2:1) solution. 1 μmol of Lipids with indicated compositions were evaporated in glass vials under a fume hood in RT. The dry lipid films were hydrated with vigorous mixing in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and 1mM TCEP. For single unilamellar vesicles (SUVs) preparations, the sonicated liposomes were extruded 35 times through a 0.1 μm polycarbonate membrane using an Avanti Mini-extruder. The quality and size of liposomes were checked by dynamic light scattering using a DynaPro Titan DLS instrument. For sulfhydryl cross-linking reactions, mouse TRIM72-80 mol% PS-SUVs complex were purified by SEC using SuperoseTM 6 Increase 10/300 GL in 50 mM Hepes-NaOH pH 7.0 and 150 mM NaCl, and then incubated at 4 °C for 90 min with 15 μM of each followed cross-linker; bismaleimidoethane, 1,4-bismaleimidobutane, 1,8-bismaleimido-diethyleneglycol and 1,11-bismaleimido-triethyleneglycol. The reactions were stopped by adding 25 mM dithiothreitol and boiled at 95 °C for 5 min with SDS-sample buffer containing 2-mercaptoethanol. The cross-linked proteins were resolved in SDS-PAGE and detected by Coomassie staining.

### Data Protocol
For cross-linking mass spectrometry, raw data were converted to mgf format using MSconvert and searched with pLink 2. The MS derived data were searched against the human entries in the UniProt database through Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.2.0.388, Thermo Scientiﬁc). The search parameters for SEQUEST algorithm included: carbamidomethylation of cysteine as ﬁxed modiﬁcations; oxidation of methionine as variable modiﬁcations; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Defects in plasma membrane repair can lead to muscle and heart diseases in humans. Tripartite motif-containing protein (TRIM)72 (mitsugumin 53; MG53) has been determined to rapidly nucleate vesicles at the site of membrane damage, but the underlying molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here we present the structure of Mus musculus TRIM72, a complete model of a TRIM E3 ubiquitin ligase. We demonstrated that the interaction between TRIM72 and phosphatidylserine-enriched membranes is necessary for its oligomeric assembly and ubiquitination activity. Using cryogenic electron tomography and subtomogram averaging, we elucidated a higher-order model of TRIM72 assembly on the phospholipid bilayer. Combining structural and biochemical techniques, we developed a working molecular model of TRIM72, providing insights into the regulation of RING-type E3 ligases through the cooperation of multiple domains in higher-order assemblies. Our findings establish a fundamental basis for the study of TRIM E3 ligases and have therapeutic implications for diseases associated with membrane repair.

### Keywords
Trim72, Lc-ms/ms, Cx-ms

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, Republic of Korea
Department of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Sehwan Jang

### Lab Head
Dr Hyun Kyu Song
Department of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea


