### Accession
PXD024335

### Title
Autophagosome content profiling  - STAR Protocol Data Set

### Description
The ascorbate peroxidase APEX2 is commonly used to study the neighborhood of a protein of interest by proximity-dependent biotinylation. Here, we describe a protocol for sample processing compatible with immunoblotting and mass spectrometry that is suitable to specifically map the content of autophagosomes and potentially other transient vesicles without the need of subcellular fractionation. By combining live-cell biotinylation with proteinase K digestion of cell homogenates, proteins enriched in membrane-protected compartments can be readily enriched and identified.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were essentially prepared as described in Zellner et al. Mol Cell 2021 (DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.01.009)

### Data Protocol
Data was essentially processed as described in Zellner et al. Mol Cell 2021 (DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.01.009)

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy deficiency in fed conditions leads to the formation of protein inclusions highlighting the contribution of this lysosomal delivery route to cellular proteostasis. Selective autophagy pathways exist that clear accumulated and aggregated ubiquitinated proteins. Receptors for this type of autophagy (aggrephagy) include p62, NBR1, TOLLIP, and OPTN, which possess LC3-interacting regions and ubiquitin-binding domains (UBDs), thus working as a bridge between LC3/GABARAP proteins and ubiquitinated substrates. However, the identity of aggrephagy substrates and the redundancy of aggrephagy and related UBD-containing receptors remains elusive. Here, we combined proximity labeling and organelle enrichment with quantitative proteomics to systematically map the autophagic degradome targeted by UBD-containing receptors under basal and proteostasis-challenging conditions in human cell lines. We identified various autophagy substrates, some of which were differentially engulfed by autophagosomal and endosomal membranes via p62 and TOLLIP, respectively. Overall, this resource will allow dissection of the proteostasis contribution of autophagy to numerous individual proteins.

### Keywords
Human, Proteinase k digest, Apex2, Proximity proteomics

### Affiliations
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
SyNergy, LMU München

### Submitter
Christian Behrends

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Behrends
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München


