### Accession
PXD017806

### Title
Mapping RNA interactions of human ATRX with RepA fragment of Xist

### Description
Heterochromatin in the eukaryotic genome is rigorously controlled by the concerted action of protein factors and RNAs.  Here, we investigate the RNA binding function of ATRX, a chromatin remodeler with roles in silencing of repetitive regions of the genome and in recruitment of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2).  We identify ATRX RNA binding regions (RBRs) and discover that the major ATRX RBR lies within the N-terminal region of the protein, distinct from its PHD and helicase domains.  Deletion of this ATRX RBR (ATRXRBR) compromises ATRX interactions with RNAs in vitro and in vivo and alters its chromatin binding properties. Genome-wide studies reveal that loss of RNA interactions results in a redistribution of ATRX on chromatin. Finally, our studies identify a role for ATRX-RNA interactions in regulating PRC2 localization to a subset of polycomb target genes.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro RBR-ID 400 ng of a 192-nucleotide fragment of Repeat A RNA was refolded for 20 min at 25°C in 1x refolding buffer [10 mM bis-tris (pH 6.7), 10 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2]. RNA was incubated with 500 ng purified ATRX protein on ice in 1x binding buffer [10 mM HEPES (pH 7.2), 100 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl¬2, 5% glycerol, 1 mM DTT]. RNA-protein mixtures were crosslinked with 1 J/cm2 UVB radiation (312 nm) using Spectrolinker XL-1500 (Spectroline). Crosslinked complexes were diluted in trypsin digestion buffer (final: 50 mM NH4HCO3 [pH 8], 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2), and treated with 12.5 μg/mL Rnase A for 30 min at 37C. To reduce proteins, samples were treated with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min at 25C, then cysteines were alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, before additional reduction with 5 mM dithiothreitol for additional 15 min in the dark. Proteins were digested with trypsin at a protease:sample ratio of 1:20 and incubated overnight at 37C. Peptides were quenched with formic acid and desalted on C18 stage tips, then dried and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid followed by mass spectrometry analysis as described previously (He et al. 2016).  Mass spectrometry Samples were analyzed by using a nanoLC-MS/MS setup. nanoLC was configured with a 75 µm ID x 20 cm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) nano-column using an EASY-nLC nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The HPLC gradient was 0-30% solvent B (A = 0.1% formic acid; B = 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 30 min followed by 5 min from 30% to 85% B and 10 min at isocratic 85% B. The flowrate was set to 300 nL/min. nLC was coupled with either an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (4 replicates) or an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (4 replicates) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Spray voltage was set at 2.5 kV and capillary temperature was set at 275 °C. For samples run on the Orbitrap Fusion instrument, samples were acquired using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method or a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method. All scans were performed in the orbitrap mass analyzer. The full MS scan was acquired at 120,000 (DDA) or 60,000 (DIA) resolution using the m/z range 300-1100, while the MS/MS scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000 using a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) set to 27. For DDA, the cycle time was set to 2 sec. For DIA, we used isolation windows of 20 m/z spanning between the m/z range 300-1100 and multiplexed in groups of 4, for a total of 10 MS/MS scans per cycle (40 windows multiplexed in groups of 4). Samples run on the Orbitrap Elite instrument were processed as above but instead with a 45-minute HPLC gradient, then acquired using a canonical DDA method. Full MS scan was performed in the orbitrap, while the MS/MS scans were performed for the top 10 most intense signals in the ion trap using a collisional-induced dissociation (CID) set to 35.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw files were processed through the MaxQuant program (Cox and Mann, 2008). All parameters for database searching were kept as default. We used a custom database containing common contaminants, human ATRX (UniProt accession P46100) and bovine Rnase1 (P61823). The “Intensity” value of the peptides from MaxQuant were used for quantification. For DIA runs, we extracted the chromatograms based on the spectral library generated by the MaxQuant search of DDA runs. The extracted ion chromatogram was performed by using Skyline (MacLean et al. 2010). For quantification, we used the area under the curve of the precursor signal.  RBR-ID analysis After removal of suspected contaminants, Maxquant peptide abundances were normalized by the sum of all peptide intensities in each MS run. For each peptide a log2-converted ratio was calculated between samples treated with or without 4SU to assess depletion mediated by RNA-crosslinking. For generation of these ratios, the mean intensity of peptides with only zero values was assigned as 0.5*(minimum observed mean peptide intensity). P values for peptides were calculated using an unpaired, two-sided Student’s t test. RBR-ID scores, which are an estimate of RNA crosslinking likelihood (He et al., 2016), were calculated for each peptide as follows:  score = -log2(+4SU/-4SU normalized peptide ratio)*(log10(P-value))2  For residue level RBR-ID scores, we summed the RBR-ID score of each peptide overlapping any given amino acid and smoothed the resulting curve using Friedman's ‘super smoother’ (Friedman, 1984).  Friedman, J.H. (1984). A variable span smoother (DTIC Document).

### Publication Abstract
Heterochromatin in the eukaryotic genome is rigorously controlled by the concerted action of protein factors and RNAs. Here, we investigate the RNA binding function of ATRX, a chromatin remodeler with roles in silencing of repetitive regions of the genome and in recruitment of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). We identify ATRX RNA binding regions (RBRs) and discover that the major ATRX RBR lies within the N-terminal region of the protein, distinct from its PHD and helicase domains. Deletion of this ATRX RBR (ATRX&#x394;RBR) compromises ATRX interactions with RNAs in vitro and in vivo and alters its chromatin binding properties. Genome-wide studies reveal that loss of RNA interactions results in a redistribution of ATRX on chromatin. Finally, our studies identify a role for ATRX-RNA interactions in regulating PRC2 localization to a subset of polycomb target genes.

### Keywords
Rbrid; rna-protein interactions; rna-binding

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Robert Warneford-Thomson

### Lab Head
Dr Roberto Bonasio
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania


