### Accession
PXD012673

### Title
DBC1 regulates p53 stability via inhibition of CBP-dependent p53 polyubiquitination

### Description
The control of p53 protein stability is critical to its tumor suppressor functions. The CREB Binding Protein (CBP) transcriptional coactivator co-operates with MDM2 to maintain normally low physiologic p53 levels in cells via an exclusively cytoplasmic ‘E4’ polyubiquitination activity. Utilizing mass spectrometry to identify nuclear and cytoplasmic CBP interacting proteins that regulate compartmentalized CBP E4 activity, we identified Deleted in Breast Cancer 1 (DBC1) as a stoichiometric CBP-interacting protein that negatively regulates CBP–dependent p53 polyubiquitination, stabilizes p53, and augments p53-dependent apoptosis. TCGA analysis demonstrated that solid tumors often retain wild type p53 alleles in conjunction with DBC1 loss, supporting the hypothesis that DBC1 is selected for disruption during carcinogenesis as a surrogate for p53 functional loss. As DBC1 maintains p53 stability in the nucleus where p53 exerts its tumor suppressive transcriptional function, replacement of DBC1 functionality in DBC1-deleted tumors might also enhance p53 function and chemosensitivity for therapeutic benefit.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells were fractionated into cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions followed by CBP IP from both fractions using anti CBP conjugated agarose beads. Eluates were separated by SDS-PAGE followed by Coomassie and silver stainings. The gel piece was transferred to a siliconized tube and washed and destained in 200 µL 50% methanol for 3 hours.  The gel pieces were dehydrated in acetonitrile, rehydrated in 30 µL of 10 mM dithiolthreitol in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and reduced at room temperature for 0.5 h.  The DTT solution was removed and the sample alkylated in 30 µL 50 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 0.5 h.  The reagent was removed and the gel pieces dehydrated in 100 µL acetonitrile.  The acetonitrile was removed and the gel pieces rehydrated in 100 µL 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate.  The pieces were dehydrated in 100 µL acetonitrile, the acetonitrile removed and the pieces completely dried by vacuum centrifugation.  The gel pieces were rehydrated in 20 ng/µL trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate on ice for 10 min.  Any excess enzyme solution was removed and 20 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate added.  The sample was digested overnight at 37 oC and the peptides formed extracted from the polyacrylamide in two 30 µL aliquots of 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid.  These extracts were combined and evaporated to 15 µL for MS analysis.   The LC-MS system consisted of a Thermo Electron Orbitrap Velos ETD mass spectrometer system with a Protana nanospray ion source interfaced to a self-packed 8 cm x 75 um id Phenomenex Jupiter 10 um C18 reversed-phase capillary column.  7 µL aliquots of the extract were injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1 M acetic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.5 µL/min over 0.3 hours.  The nanospray ion source was operated at 2.5 kV.  The digest was analyzed using the rapid switching capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights followed by product ion spectra (20) to determine amino acid sequence in sequential scans.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.4.1.14). Sequest was set up to search UniProt Human Database assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethyl of cysteine and propionamide of cysteine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 60.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Peptide identifications were also required to exceed specific database search engine thresholds. Sequest identifications required at least . Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.Proteins were annotated with GO terms from NCBI (downloaded May 19, 2014) and NCBI (downloaded May 21, 2014). (Ashburner, M et al Nat. Genet. 2000;25(1):25-9).

### Publication Abstract
The control of p53 protein stability is critical to its tumor suppressor functions. The CREB binding protein (CBP) transcriptional co-activator co-operates with MDM2 to maintain normally low physiological p53 levels in cells via exclusively cytoplasmic E4 polyubiquitination activity. Using mass spectrometry to identify nuclear and cytoplasmic CBP-interacting proteins that regulate compartmentalized CBP E4 activity, we identified deleted in breast cancer 1 (DBC1) as a stoichiometric CBP-interacting protein that negatively regulates CBP-dependent p53 polyubiquitination, stabilizes p53, and augments p53-dependent apoptosis. TCGA analysis demonstrated that solid tumors often retain wild-type p53 alleles in conjunction with DBC1 loss, supporting the hypothesis that DBC1 is selected for disruption during carcinogenesis as a surrogate for p53 functional loss. Because DBC1 maintains p53 stability in the nucleus, where p53 exerts its tumor-suppressive transcriptional function, replacement of DBC1 functionality in DBC1-deleted tumors might enhance p53 function and chemosensitivity for therapeutic benefit.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Cbp, Lc-msms, Dbc1, Apoptosis, P53

### Affiliations
University of Virginia
Department of Internal Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU), Richmond, VA, USA

### Submitter
JJ Park

### Lab Head
Dr Steven R. Grossman
Department of Internal Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU), Richmond, VA, USA


