### Accession
PXD026093

### Title
Beyond self-resistance: ABCF ATPase LmrC is a signal-transducing component of an antibiotic-driven signaling cascade hastening the onset of lincomycin biosynthesis

### Description
In natural environments, antibiotics are an important instrument of inter-species competition. At subinhibitory concentrations, they act as cues or signals inducing antibiotic production: however, our knowledge of well-documented antibiotic-based sensing systems is limited. Here, for the soil actinobacterium Streptomyces lincolnensis we describe a fundamentally new ribosome-mediated signaling cascade that accelerates the onset of lincomycin production in response to an external ribosome-targeting antibiotic to synchronize the antibiotic production within the population. The entire cascade is encoded within the lincomycin biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) and besides the transcriptional regulator, LmbU it consists of three lincomycin resistance proteins: a lincomycin transporter, LmrA, a 23S rRNA methyltransferase, LmrB, both conferring a high resistance, and an ABCF ATPase LmrC that confers only moderate resistance but is indispensable for the antibiotic-induced signal transduction. Specifically, the antibiotic sensing occurs via a ribosome-mediated attenuation, which activates LmrC production in response to lincosamide, streptogramin A, or pleuromutilin antibiotics. Then, the ribosome-operating LmrC ATPase activity triggers the transcription of lmbU and consequently the expression of lincomycin BGC. Finally, the production of LmrC is downregulated by LmrA and LmrB which reduces the amount of the ribosome-bound antibiotic and thus fine-tune the cascade. We propose that analogous ABCF-mediated signaling systems are relatively common because many BGCs for ribosome-targeting antibiotics encode an ABCF-protein accompanied by additional resistance protein(s) and transcriptional regulators. Moreover, we revealed that three of eight co-produced ABCF proteins of S. lincolnensis are clindamycin-responsive thus the ABCF-mediated antibiotic signaling might be generally utilized tool of chemical communication.

### Sample Protocol
Strains and growth conditions  S. lincolnensis ATCC 25466 and its derived mutants were germinated and inoculated into 50 ml of YPM2 (OD450 0.03) supplemented or not with 0.5 mg.l-1 of clindamycin in 250 ml baffled flasks and cultivated on an orbital shaker for 40 h at 30°C and 200 rpm. 2.5 ml of the YPM2 seed culture was used to inoculate 47.5 ml of fresh AVM broth (60) followed by cultivation in 250 ml baffled flasks for 120 h at 30°C and 200 rpm (Fig. S7b).  Protein digestion for proteomic analysis. 0.1 g of mycelia of 40 h seed culture inoculated from fresh spores (Fig. S7b) was lysed in 0.5 ml 100 mM TEAB containing 2% SDC, 10 mM TCEP, and 40 mM chloroacetamide and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo), and 20 µg of protein per sample was used for MS sample preparation. Samples were digested with trypsin (at a trypsin/protein ratio of 1/20) at 37°C overnight. After digestion, the samples were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 1%. SDC was removed by extraction to ethylacetate (69), and peptides were desalted on a Michrom C18 column.  nLC-MS2 Analysis. Nano-reversed-phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) were used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 17.5 μl min-1 loading buffer composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with a mobile phase B gradient from 4% to 35% B in 60 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120 K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104, and the maximum injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge states of 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles (70).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis and interpretation. All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) (71). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Streptomyces lincolnensis database (downloaded from NCBI on July 2018). Enzyme specificity was set with the C-terminus as Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min), and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with label-free algorithms described recently. Obtained normalized data were imported to Perseus 1.6.1.3 software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich) (72). All numeric values corresponding to protein intensity were transformed to a logarithmic scale, and all samples were grouped using categorical annotation. Missing values were then replaced by random numbers drawn from a normal distribution of 1.8 standard deviations downshift and with a width of 0.3 of each sample. Heat maps of the relative abundance of selected proteins were generated from the matrix of protein intensities without imputation of missing values in Microsoft Excel. Proteomic analysis in 40 h was assessed in 5 biological (4 for ΔC without clindamycin) replicates for each sample/treatment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Lincomycin, Lmrc, Streptomyces lincolnensis

### Affiliations
Charles University
Head of the Antibiotic Resistance Research group Laboratory for Biology of Secondary Metabolism Institute of Microbiology BIOCEV Průmyslová 959 252 42 Vestec Czech Republic

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriela Balíková Novotná, PhD.
Head of the Antibiotic Resistance Research group Laboratory for Biology of Secondary Metabolism Institute of Microbiology BIOCEV Průmyslová 959 252 42 Vestec Czech Republic


