### Accession
PXD018211

### Title
Stoichiometry of two plant glycine decarboxylase complexes and comparison with a cyanobacterial glycine cleavage system

### Description
The multienzyme glycine cleavage system (GCS) converts glycine and tetrahydrofolate to the one-carbon compound 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate, which is of vital importance for most if not all organisms. Photorespiring plant mitochondria contain very high levels of GCS proteins organized as a fragile glycine decarboxylase complex (GDC). The aim of this study is to provide mass spectrometry-based stoichiometric data for the plant leaf GDC and examine whether complex formation could be a general property of the GCS in photosynthesizing organisms. To this end, we investigated the mitochondrial content, the stoichiometry and the isoprotein composition of the Arabidopsis thaliana leaf GDC in comparison with that of Pisum sativum using stable-isotope-labeled peptides (QconCAT and synthetic labeled peptides) and compared the results to label-free, Hi3 peptide quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were isolated from leaves of Pisum sativum cv. Kleine Rheinländerin (3-weeks-old plants) and Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 (8-weeks-old plants) by Percoll density gradient centrifugation. Matrix proteins were released by several freeze-thaw cycles followed by 1 h centrifugation at 40 000 x g. A synthetic protein was designed that comprises a concatenation of proteotypic peptides (QconCAT, Pratt el al., 2006) to facilitate the stoichiometric analysis of the GCS in Arabidopsis and pea leaf mitochondria. Expressed in E. coli, the isotope-labeled QconCAT was obtained by growing cells with 15NH4Cl as sole nitrogen source and purified by immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC). Synthetic labeled peptides (SpikeTides TQL, labeled with 13C15N Lys) were purchased from JPT Peptide Technologies (Berlin, Germany). In-solution digestion of proteins was done by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP, Wiśniewski et al., 2009).  LC-MSE analyses were carried out using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled to a Waters Synapt G2-S mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on an analytical column (ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters) at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 using a gradient from 3% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 90 min. The Synapt G2-S instrument was operated in data-independent mode (Geromanos et al., 2009). By executing alternate scans at low and elevated collision energy, information on precursor and fragment ions, respectively, was acquired (referred to as MSE).

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for Proteomics version 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used for raw data processing, protein identification and MS1 intensity-based quantification. Label-free absolute quantification was performed by the Hi3 method (Silva et al. 2006) with Hi3 Phos B standard (Waters) as reference. For label-based quantification, the quotients of light and heavy peptide ion abundances were multiplied by the amount of heavy peptides applied to the LC column.

### Publication Abstract
The multienzyme glycine cleavage system (GCS) converts glycine and tetrahydrofolate to the one-carbon compound 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate, which is of vital importance for most if not all organisms. Photorespiring plant mitochondria contain very high levels of GCS proteins organised as a fragile glycine decarboxylase complex (GDC). The aim of this study is to provide mass spectrometry-based stoichiometric data for the plant leaf GDC and examine whether complex formation could be a general property of the GCS in photosynthesizing organisms. The molar ratios of the leaf GDC component proteins are 1L<sub>2</sub> -4P<sub>2</sub> -8T-26H and 1L<sub>2</sub> -4P<sub>2</sub> -8T-20H for pea and Arabidopsis, respectively, as determined by mass spectrometry. The minimum mass of the plant leaf GDC ranges from 1550 to 1650&#xa0;kDa, which is larger than previously assumed. The Arabidopsis GDC contains four times more of the isoforms GCS-P1 and GCS-L1 in comparison with GCS-P2 and GCS-L2, respectively, whereas the H-isoproteins GCS-H1 and GCS-H3 are fully redundant as indicated by their about equal amounts. Isoform GCS-H2 is not present in leaf mitochondria. In the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, GCS proteins concentrations are low but above the complex formation threshold reported for pea leaf GDC. Indeed, formation of a cyanobacterial GDC from the individual recombinant GCS proteins in vitro could be demonstrated. Presence and metabolic significance of a Synechocystis GDC in vivo remain to be examined but could involve multimers of the GCS H-protein that dynamically crosslink the three GCS enzyme proteins, facilitating glycine metabolism by the formation of multienzyme metabolic complexes. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018211.

### Keywords
Stoichiometry, Quantification, Arabidopsis, Glycine decarboxylase complex, Pea, Qconcat

### Affiliations
University of Rostock, Department of Plant Physiology, Albert-Einstein-Straße 3, D-18059 Rostock, Germany
Core Facility Proteome Analysis, University Medicine Rostock, Schillingallee 69, 18057 Rostock

### Submitter
Stefan Mikkat

### Lab Head
Dr Hermann Bauwe
University of Rostock, Department of Plant Physiology, Albert-Einstein-Straße 3, D-18059 Rostock, Germany


