### Accession
PXD034968

### Title
iBench Ground Truth Validation Tool

### Description
iBench is an open-source tool that provides enhanced validation of Mass Spectrometry identification methods. For this project, iBench was applied to Percolator rescored results from Mascot searches from a tryptic digestion of the K562 proteome, HLA-I immunopeptidome experiment, and synthetic peptide libraries. Here we provide the Mascot search results which were benchmarked as well as the original searches used to generate the ground truth identifications. These search results were generated by reprocessing RAW data from the PXD031709, PXD034056 and PXD031812 repositories.

### Sample Protocol
For sample processing of the original raw files see the details provided in the original PXD031709, PXD034056 and PXD031812 repositories.

### Data Protocol
Proteomes were measured through Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer. Digested proteome samples were injected using an Ultimate 3,000 RSLC nano pump (both from ThermoFisherScientiﬁc). Briefly, 0.5 µg of each sample was loaded and separated by a nanoflow HPLC (RSLC Ultimate 3000) on an Easy-spray C18 nano column (30 cm length, 75 µm internal diameter). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5%–45% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 58 min at 50°C. The instrument was programmed within Xcalibur 3.1.66.10 to acquire MS data in a Data Dependent Acquisition mode using Top 30 precursor ions.  We acquired one full-scan MS spectrum at a resolution of 60,000 with a normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 300% and a scan range of 350-1,600 m/z. The MS/MS fragmentation was conducted using HCD collision energy (28%) with an orbitrap resolution of 15,000. The normalized AGC target value was set up at 100% with a max injection time of 40 ms.  A dynamic exclusion of 22s and 2-6 included charged states were defined within this method. Searches were carried out using PEAKS 10.6, Mascot 2.7 (using Mascot Distiller 2.8.0.1 for preprocessing) and Mascot 1.6.17. Original searches for the K562 proteome and immunoeptidome data were carried out using RNA-based reference database provided in PXD034056. Searches of the synthetic peptide library data were carried out using the lists of peptides available in PXD031709.

### Publication Abstract
The discovery of many noncanonical peptides detectable with sensitive mass spectrometry inside, outside, and on cells shepherded the development of novel methods for their identification, often not supported by a systematic benchmarking with other methods. We here propose iBench, a bioinformatic tool that can construct ground truth proteomics datasets and cognate databases, thereby generating a training court wherein methods, search engines, and proteomics strategies can be tested, and their performances estimated by the same tool. iBench can be coupled to the main database search engines, allows the selection of customized features of mass spectrometry spectra and peptides, provides standard benchmarking outputs, and is open source. The proof-of-concept application to tryptic proteome digestions, immunopeptidomes, and synthetic peptide libraries dissected the impact that noncanonical peptides could have on the identification of canonical peptides by Mascot search with rescoring via Percolator (Mascot+Percolator).

### Keywords
Proteomics, Mascot, Benchmarking, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Michele Mishto, Head of the research group Molecular Immunology at King’s College London and the Francis Crick Institute, London (UK). Email: michele.mishto@kcl.ac.uk, Juliane Liepe, Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Goettingen (D); Germany (lab head). Email: jliepe@mpinat.mpg.de
King's College London

### Submitter
Michele Mishto

### Lab Head
Dr Michele Mishto, Juliane Liepe
Michele Mishto, Head of the research group Molecular Immunology at King’s College London and the Francis Crick Institute, London (UK). Email: michele.mishto@kcl.ac.uk, Juliane Liepe, Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Goettingen (D); Germany (lab head). Email: jliepe@mpinat.mpg.de


