### Accession
PXD031177

### Title
An optimized glycopeptide enrichment method – it’s all about the sauce

### Description
Protein glycosylation is a family of post translational modifications (PTMs) that play a crucial role in cellular and tissue biology, and whose role in disease is unraveled with every new finding. Enrichment and analysis of such a diverse family of modification is very challenging, due to the number of possible glycan-peptide combinations. Among the methods used for enrichment of glycopeptides, boronic acid never lived up to its promise. While most studies focused on improving the affinity of the sugars to boronic acid, we discovered that buffer choice is as important for successful enrichment if not more.  We show that amine-less buffer allows for the best enrichment results in human plasma and brain specimens. We speculate that amines compete with the glycans for boronic acid binding, therefore eliminating them improved the method significantly.

### Sample Protocol
Brain and plasma samples were digested using S-trap. 100ug aliquots of digested peptides were enriched for glycopeptides using carboxybenzoboroxole-derivatised beads. we have tested four different buffers for enrichment: Glycine buffer (pH 10.6), Triethylammonium acetate (pH 11), Carbonate-bicarbonate buffer (pH 10.5) and Ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5).  Glycopeptides were eluted using 1% Formic acid / 50% Acetonitrile. Samples were run on a HSS T3 column (Waters) and analyzed using a Orbitrap Lumos instrument, acquiring using EThcD fragmentation. Data was analyzed using Byonic search engine and quantified using FlashLFQ.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using Byonic search engine: data was searched against the human proteome database, 84 human plasma glycan library or 184 human glycan library. Additional modifications allowed were Hex on K & W, phospho STY, protein N-terminal acetylation. Data was quantified using FlashLFQ allowing match between runs, but not normalization

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycosylation is a family of posttranslational modifications that play a crucial role in many biological pathways and diseases. The enrichment and analysis of such a diverse family of modifications are very challenging because of the number of possible glycan-peptide combinations. Among the methods used for the enrichment of glycopeptides, boronic acid never lived up to its promise. While most studies focused on improving the affinity of the boronic acids to the sugars, we discovered that the buffer choice is just as important for successful enrichment if not more so. We show that an amine-less buffer allows for the best glycoproteomic coverage, in human plasma and brain specimens, improving total quantified glycopeptides by over 10-fold, and reaching 1598 N-linked glycopeptides in the brain and 737 in nondepleted plasma. We speculate that amines compete with the glycans for boronic acid binding, and therefore the elimination of them improved the method significantly.

### Keywords
Brain, Plasma, Glycopeptide, Ptm, Boronic acid, Glycation

### Affiliations
Weizmann institute
The Nancy and Stephen Grand Israel National Center for Personalised Medicine Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel Tel. 972-8-9344902

### Submitter
David Morgenstern

### Lab Head
Dr Yishai Levin
The Nancy and Stephen Grand Israel National Center for Personalised Medicine Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel Tel. 972-8-9344902


