### Accession
PXD034961

### Title
Riluzole partially restores RNA polymerase III complex assembly in cells expressing the leukodystrophy-causative variant POLR3B R103H

### Description
The mechanism of assembly of RNA polymerase III (Pol III), the 17-subunit enzyme that synthesizes tRNAs, 5S rRNA, and other small-nuclear (sn) RNAs in eukaryotes, is not clearly understood. The recent discovery of the HSP90 co-chaperone PAQosome (Particle for Arrangement of Quaternary structure) revealed a function for this machinery in the biogenesis of nuclear RNA polymerases. However, the connection between Pol III subunits and the PAQosome during the assembly process remains unexplored. Here, we report the development of a mass spectrometry-based assay that allows the characterization of Pol III assembly. This assay was used to dissect the stages of Pol III assembly, to start defining the function of the PAQosome in this process, to dissect the assembly defects driven by the leukodystrophy-causative R103H substitution in POLR3B, and to discover that riluzole, an FDA-approved drug for alleviation of ALS symptoms, partly corrects these assembly defects. Together, these results shed new light on the mechanism and regulation of human nuclear Pol III biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
For FLAG-tagged affinity purification:  4.26 μg of FLAG-tagged POLR3A WT or 8.51 μg of FLAG-tagged POLR3B (WT or R103H) expression vectors produced previously1, 2 were transiently transfected in 15-cm plates containing 1.6×107 cells/plate of HEK-293, cells were grown overnight, by using Jet Prime transfection reagent according to the  manufacturer’s instructions. Transfected cells were incubated at 37°C for indicated time, harvested on ice, washed with iced-cold 1X PBS and snap freeze in liquid nitrogen. In indicated experiments, 12.5 µM of riluzole was added 4 h after transfection of the WT, the FLAG-tagged POLR3B R103H or the empty vector, and transfected cells were harvested 20 h later on ice. DMSO-treated transfected cells were used as negative controls.  Cell membranes were disrupted by a 30 min incubation at 4°C on a tube rotator followed by a liquid nitrogen freeze-thaw cycles in lysis buffer (25 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, 0,05% NP-40, 5% Glycerol, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT, 1X cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Millipore Sigma, COEDTAF-RO), 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM NaF and 1 mM Na3VO4). The protein extracts were cleared of insoluble material by centrifugation (16 000 xg , 30 min, 4°C) and the protein content was assessed by Bradford assay. 30 µL of anti-FLAG (M2) magnetic bead slurry were washed four times with 1 mL of lysis buffer, then incubated for three hours with 1.5 mg of total proteins extract at 4°C on a tube rotator. The beads were then washed four times in 1 mL of lysis buffer and four more times in 1 mL wash buffer (75 mM KCl, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0). The bound proteins were eluted by three successive 15 min incubations in 150 µL of ammonium hydroxide solution pH 11-12 (roughly 10 %) in HPLC-grade water. The combined fractions were dried in a speed-vac and then resuspended in 10 µL of 6 M urea. Reduction buffer was added at a volume of 2.5 µL (45 mM DTT, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and the samples were incubated for 30 min at 37°C. An additional 2.5 µL of alkylation buffer (100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) were included to the mix followed by 20 min incubation at 24°C and in absence of light. 20 µL of HPLC-grade water were added to reduce urea concentration and trypsin digestion was performed using a 1:20 (enzyme:protein) ratio of sequencing grade modified trypsin and 18 h incubation at 37°C on a ThermoMixer. Following a quick centrifugation (500 xg, 1 min) the peptides were collected. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to the samples and residual salts and detergents were removed using an Oasis MCX 96-well Elution Plate loaded onto a Positive Pressure-96 Processor according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluates were dried down in vacuum centrifuge and then re-solubilized under agitation for 15 min in 11 µL of 2% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid, of which 5 µL were used for LC-MS/MS.  1. Choquet, K.;  Yang, S.;  Moir, R. D.;  Forget, D.;  Lariviere, R.;  Bouchard, A.;  Poitras, C.;  Sgarioto, N.;  Dicaire, M. J.;  Noohi, F.;  Kennedy, T. E.;  Rochford, J.;  Bernard, G.;  Teichmann, M.;  Coulombe, B.;  Willis, I. M.;  Kleinman, C. L.; Brais, B., Absence of neurological abnormalities in mice homozygous for the Polr3a G672E hypomyelinating leukodystrophy mutation. Mol Brain 2017, 10 (1), 13.  2. Choquet, K.;  Pinard, M.;  Yang, S.;  Moir, R. D.;  Poitras, C.;  Dicaire, M. J.;  Sgarioto, N.;  Lariviere, R.;  Kleinman, C. L.;  Willis, I. M.;  Gauthier, M. S.;  Coulombe, B.; Brais, B., The leukodystrophy mutation Polr3b R103H causes homozygote mouse embryonic lethality and impairs RNA polymerase III biogenesis. Mol Brain 2019, 12 (1), 59.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry and data analysis: High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was performed using C18 resin (5 µm particles, 300 Å pores) extracted from a Jupiter LC Column (00B-4053-E0) and packed in a PicoFrit Column (NEW OBJECTIVE, PF360-75-15-N-5), the latter of which was loaded into a Easy-nLC II instrument. Employed buffers were: 0.2% formic acid (buffer A) and 100% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid (buffer B). Peptide elution was performed with a two-slope gradient at a flowrate of 250 nL/min. Solvent B gradually increased from 2 to 37% over the course of 90 min and then from 37 to 80% B in 10 min. The HPLC system was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer through a nano-ESI source. Nanospray and S-lens voltages were set to 1.3–1.8 kV and 50 V, respectively. Capillary temperature was set to 225°C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 360-1560) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 with a target value at 1e6. The 25 most intense peptide ions were fragmented in the HCD collision cell and analyzed in the linear ion trap with a target value at 2e4 and normalized collision energy at 28. Target ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 25 sec.  Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) intensity for each proteins were obtained using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) against the characterized human UniProtKB database (release on June 3th 2018). Log2 transformation, imputation and further statistical analysis were performed with Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) or Graphpad Prism 8 (Version 8.4.3). All purifications were done in triplicate and proteins detected in all experiments were kept for further analysis. Missing values were replaced by randomly generated intensities normally distributed with a width of 0.3 times and a downshift of 1.8 times the standard deviation of non-zero intensities. Significant differences between Log2 protein intensities from bait purifications and corresponding control groups were then determined using a two-tailed T-test subsequently adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing with a permutation-based False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.05 and a s0 factor of 0.1 with 10,000 iterations. For WT and mutant comparison or riluzole- and DMSO-treated samples comparison, proteins that did not show enrichment in either conditions compared to their respective control (i.e. p-values > 0.05 and ratio ≤ 2) were discarded. In appropriate experiments, Log2-transformed LFQ-intensities were analyzed using a Two-way ANOVA. In the event of a significant probability value, Tukey post-hoc multiple comparison test was used in drug-treated WT or mutant samples. For all analyses, p ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanism of assembly of RNA polymerase III (Pol III), the 17-subunit enzyme that synthesizes tRNAs, 5&#xa0;S rRNA, and other small-nuclear (sn) RNAs in eukaryotes, is not clearly understood. The recent discovery of the HSP90 co-chaperone PAQosome (Particle for Arrangement of Quaternary structure) revealed a function for this machinery in the biogenesis of nuclear RNA polymerases. However, the connection between Pol III subunits and the PAQosome during the assembly process remains unexplored. Here, we report the development of a mass spectrometry-based assay that allows the characterization of Pol III assembly. This assay was used to dissect the stages of Pol III assembly, to start defining the function of the PAQosome in this process, to dissect the assembly defects driven by the leukodystrophy-causative R103H substitution in POLR3B, and to discover that riluzole, an FDA-approved drug for alleviation of ALS symptoms, partly corrects these assembly defects. Together, these results shed new light on the mechanism and regulation of human nuclear Pol III biogenesis.

### Keywords
Paqosome, Protein complex assembly, Drug repurposing, Rna polymerase iii, Polr3-related leukodystrophy, Mass spectrometry, Riluzole, 4h leukodystrophy

### Affiliations
Translational Proteomics Laboratory, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Québec, Montréal, Canada. Departement of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Université de Montréal, Québec, Montréal, Canada. (Laboratory Director)
Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM)

### Submitter
Maxime Pinard

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Coulombe
Translational Proteomics Laboratory, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Québec, Montréal, Canada. Departement of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Université de Montréal, Québec, Montréal, Canada. (Laboratory Director)


