### Accession
PXD004442

### Title
Phosphoproteome Analysis Reveals Differential Mode of Action of Sorafenib in Wildtype and Mutated FLT3 AML Cells

### Description
Constitutively activating internal tandem duplication (ITD) alterations of the receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3 (Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3) are common in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and classifies FLT3 as an attractive therapeutic target. So far, application of FLT3 small molecule inhibitors such as Sorafenib has resulted only in partial and transient clinical responses in FLT3-ITD+ patients. Only recently, a prolonged event-free survival has been observed in AML patients who were treated with Sorafenib in addition to standard therapy. Here, we studied the Sorafenib effect on proliferation in a panel of 13 FLT3-ITD- and FLT3-ITD+ AML cell lines. Sorafenib IC50 values ranged from 0.001 to 5.6 µM, whereas FLT3-ITD+ cells (MOLM-13, MV4;11) were found more sensitive to Sorafenib than FLT3-ITD- cells. However, we identified two FLT3-ITD- cell lines (MONO-MAC-1 and OCI-AML-2) which were also Sorafenib sensitive. Phosphoproteome analyses revealed that the affected pathways differed in Sorafenib sensitive FLT3-ITD- and FLT3-ITD+ cells. In MV4;11 cells Sorafenib suppressed mTOR signalling by inhibiting direct inhibition of FLT3. In MONO-MAC-1 cells Sorafenib inhibited the MEK/ERK pathway by inhibition of the RET tyrosine kinase. These data suggest that the FLT3 status in AML patients might not be the only predictive factor for a response to Sorafenib.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphoproteomics MV4;11, MONO-MAC-1 and SKM-1 cells were cultured in SILAC media containing 60.6 mg/ml Arg0 and 50 mg/ml Lys0 (light label), 62.3 mg/ml Arg6 and 61.1 mg/ml Lys4 (medium label), and  63.4 mg/ml Arg10 and 62.2 mg/ml Lys8 (heavy label).  SILAC media were supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA), 1% penicillin and streptomycin (Biochrom AG, Berlin, Germany), 1% glutamine (PAA, Pasching, Austria) and 1 % sodium pyruvate (PAA). Cells were cultured for at least seven cell doublings to reach > 95% of incorporation of amino acids arginine and lysine, before treatment for two hours with DMSO, 0.01 or 0.2 µM Sorafenib, respectively. Cells were lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer [8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 8.2, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 10 mM NaF, 10 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 2 mM Na3VO4, phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 1 and 2 (Sigma-Aldrich) and protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Applied Science, Mannheim, Germany)] and sonicated three times for 1 min on ice.  Lysates from the differently SILAC-encoded cells were pooled, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested in-solution with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako, Neuss, Germany) and trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) as described before.(23) Tryptic peptides were desalted using reversed-phase 500 mg C18 SepPak cartridges (Waters, Eschborn, Germany) and fractionated by SCX chromatography [250 x 9.4 mm polySULFOETHYL A column, 200 Å pore size, 5 µM particle size (PolyLC)] operated with ÄKTA explorer system (GE Healthcare, München, Germany) as described previously.(24) The resulting twelve peptide samples were desalted using reversed-phase 100 mg C18 SepPak cartridges (Waters) before phosphopeptide enrichment with immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) in two successive enrichment steps essentially as described before.(24–26) The resulting 24 samples per cell line were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Phosphopeptide-enriched samples were loaded onto a reverse phase analytical column (packed in-house with C18 beads), resolved by an acetonitrile gradient using an Easy nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and directly electrosprayed via a nanoelectrospray ion source into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Wlatham, MA).(23,27) The Orbitrap mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically switch between full scans in the orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution R=60.000) and the acquisition of CID fragmentation spectra (MS/MS mode) of the fifteen most abundant peptide ions in the linear ion trap (LTQ). For optimal phosphopeptide dissociation the multi-stage activation (MSA) modus was selected.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of phosphorylation sites was performed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.4.0.6) using the human Swissprot database (version 07.2013). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. The minimum required peptide length was seven amino acids and the minimum ratio count was set to two. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was selected for both protein and peptide identifications and a posterior error probability (PEP) below or equal to 0.1 for each peptide-to-spectral match was required. The match between runs option was enabled for a time window of 1 min. Intensity ratios were transformed to reflect Sorafenib versus DMSO control. Phosphorylation sites of low confidence (non Class-I), reverse hits, or potential contaminants were removed. Significantly regulated phosphorylation sites were identified using the parametric MeanRank test. Significance testing was performed separately for all three cell models, using sites that were quantified in at least two of the three replicates. The MeanRank tests intrinsically handles missing values and automatically corrects for multiple hypothesis testing. Phosphorylation sites were considered significantly regulated at an FDR < 0.05. Enrichment analyses of gene ontology (GO) cellular component categories and KEGG pathways were performed for phosphoproteins regulated upon treatment with Sorafenib compared to all phosphoproteins harboring quantified phosphosites by non-conditional hypergeometric testing using Fisher’s Exact Test. Enrichment of kinase substrates among significantly regulated phosphorylationsites was performed analogously. To correct for multiple hypothesis testing, FDR correction according to Benjamini-Hochberg was performed (FDR < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Constitutively activating internal tandem duplication (ITD) alterations of the receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3 (Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3) are common in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and classifies FLT3 as an attractive therapeutic target. So far, applications of FLT3 small molecule inhibitors have been investigated primarily in FLT3-ITD<sup>+</sup> patients. Only recently, a prolonged event-free survival has been observed in AML patients who were treated with the multikinase inhibitor sorafenib in addition to standard therapy. Here, we studied the sorafenib effect on proliferation in a panel of 13 FLT3-ITD<sup>-</sup> and FLT3-ITD<sup>+</sup> AML cell lines. Sorafenib IC50 values ranged from 0.001 to 5.6 &#x3bc;m, whereas FLT3-ITD<sup>+</sup> cells (MOLM-13, MV4-11) were found to be more sensitive to sorafenib than FLT3-ITD<sup>-</sup> cells. However, we identified two FLT3-ITD<sup>-</sup> cell lines (MONO-MAC-1 and OCI-AML-2) which were also sorafenib sensitive. Phosphoproteome analyses revealed that the affected pathways differed in sorafenib sensitive FLT3-ITD<sup>-</sup> and FLT3-ITD<sup>+</sup> cells. In MV4-11 cells sorafenib suppressed mTOR signaling by direct inhibition of FLT3. In MONO-MAC-1 cells sorafenib inhibited the MEK/ERK pathway. These data suggest that the FLT3 status in AML patients might not be the only factor predicting response to treatment with sorafenib.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Flt3, Sorafenib, Acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
Evotec (München) GmbH, Martinsried, Germany
Evotec

### Submitter
Christoph Schaab

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Schaab
Evotec (München) GmbH, Martinsried, Germany


