### Accession
PXD014713

### Title
Chemical labeling for fine mapping of IgG N-glycosylation by ETD-MS

### Description
Immunoglobulin G (IgG), which contains four subclasses (IgG1-4), is one of the most important class of glycoproteins in immune system. Because of its importance in immune system, a steady increase of interest in developing IgG as biomarker or biotherapeutic agents for the treatment of diseases has been seen, as most therapeutic mAbs were IgG-based. N-glycosylation of IgG is crucial for its effector function and makes the IgG highly heterogeneous both in structure and function, although all four subclasses of IgG contain only a single N-glycosylation site in the Fc region with highly similar amino acid sequence. Therefore, fine mapping the IgG glycosylation is necessary for understanding the IgG function and avoiding aberrant glycosylation in mAbs. However, site-specific and comprehensive N-glycosylation analysis of IgG subclasses still cannot be achieved by MS alone due to the partial sequence coverage and loss of connections among glycosylation on protein sequence. We report here a chemical labeling strategy to improve the electron transfer dissociation efficiency in mass spectrometry analysis, which enable a 100% peptide sequence coverage of N-glycopeptides in all subclasses of IgG. Combining with high-energy collisional dissociation for the fragmentation of glycans, fine mapping of N-glycosylation profile of IgG is achieved. This comprehensive glycosylation analysis strategy for the first time allows the discrimination of IgG3 and IgG4 intact N-glycopeptides with high similarity in sequence without the antibody-based pre-separation. Using this strategy, aberrant serum IgG N-glycosylation for four IgG subclasses associated with cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma were revealed. Moreover, this method identifies 5 times more intact glycopeptides from human serum than native-ETD method, implying that the approach can also accommodate for large-scale site-specific profiling of glycoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The workflow of this strategy for IgG serum samples were same and were performed in the following order: protein digestion, dimethylation, DMEN-amidation and LC-ESI-MS/MS Analysis. For IgG from serum samples, the workflow was same except another process of IgG purification before protein digestion. IgG Purification. IgG was isolated from human plasma using Protein G. Firstly, the protein G-agarose (20 L) were wash with 200 L binding buffer (RIPA lysis buffer/cook tail/H2O, 10/0.2/90, v/v/v), for three times. Secondly, 10 L of blood serum were diluted with 90 L binding buffer and then diluted samples were added into protein G-agarose and incubated for 3 hours with moderate agitation at 4℃. After that, the sample were centrifuged for 90 seconds at 10,000 rcf and then wiping off invalid portion. Subsequently, the sample was washed by 100L binding buffer to thoroughly wash away all unbound non-IgG protein components for three times. Last, 50 L elution buffer (0.1% TFA) were added and incubated for 5 minutes with moderate agitation at 4℃. And then the sample was centrifuged and collected. This step was repeated three times. The purity of eluted IgG was further validated by SDS-PAGE and quantiﬁed by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) methods at 562 nm. At last, the IgG was stored at -20 °C until digestion. Protein Digestion. First, standard proteins (IgG and fetuin) were dissolved in 100 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8.0) at 0.5 mg/ml. Then, the proteins were thermal denaturation and reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °C and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. After that, the proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin at a ratio of 1/20 (enzyme/protein, w/w). For serum protein digestion, 10 L serum (containing about 900 g proteins) were diluted with 190 L 8 M urea solution, and then reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 h and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM IAA at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. After that, the molecular compounds were removed by acetone precipitation. And then proteins were redissolved with 100 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8.0) at 0.5 mg/ml. Finally, the proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin at a ratio of 1/50 (enzyme/protein, w/w).  Dimethylation. After digestion, the solution containing peptides were labeled with CH3 (light), CD2H (medium) and 13CD3 (heavy), respectively. Brieﬂy, 100 g peptides was dissolved in 200 L 100 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8.0), and then 17 L 4% formaldehyde solution (HCHO, DCDO or D13CDO) and 17 L 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride solution (NaBH3CN or NaBD3CN) were added. The reaction mixture was rincubated at 37 °C for 2 h. At last, the dimethyl labeled peptides were desalted using a C18 SPE cartridge and subsequently lyophilized in vacuum.  DMEN-amidation. The reaction condition was described previously with minor modiﬁcation.[1] Brieﬂy 100 g dimethyl peptides were dissolved in 29 L DMSO, and then 1L TEAB (1 M), 5L N, N-Dimethylethylenediamine (5 M), 2.5 L N-methylmorpholine were added and vortexed. Subsequently, 12.5 µL PyAOP (400 mM in DMSO) solution were added. The reaction mixture was vortexed and stood at room temperature for 2 h. After reaction, the reaction solution was diluted with 1 mL loading buffer (80% ACN containing 1% TFA), and then the N-glycopeptides were enriched using in-house ZIC-HILIC micro-column. Brieﬂy, after the ZIC-HILIC column was equilibrated by the loading buffer for three times, the peptides were loaded into ZIC-HILIC micro-column, and then the column was washed with 200 L loading buffer for three times. Then, enriched N-glycopeptides were eluted with 100 μL 0.1% TFA for three times. And subsequently dried by vacuum centrifugation for MALDI-MS and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI-MS/MS Analysis. The MS parameters for N-glycopeptide analysis were set as follow. MS1: scan range (m/z) = 500-2000; resolution = 120k; AGC target = 200,000; maximum injection time = 50 ms; dynamic exclusion after n times, n = 1; dynamic exclusion duration = 15 s; each selected precursor was subject to one HCD-MS/MS and one ETD-MS/MS. MS/MS: isolation window = 2; detector type = Orbitrap; resolution = 15k; AGC target =200,000; maximum injection time = 150 ms; HCD collision energy = 30% (NCE), ETD and EThcD was default settings. Besides, HCD collision energy was 25% (NCE) for EThcD.

### Publication Abstract
Immunoglobulin G (IgG), which contains four subclasses (IgG1-4), is one of the most important classes of glycoproteins in the immune system. Because of its importance in the immune system, a steady increase of interest in developing IgG as the biomarker or biotherapeutic agent for the treatment of diseases has been seen, as most therapeutic mAbs were IgG-based. N-Glycosylation of IgG is crucial for its effector function and makes IgG highly heterogeneous both in structure and function, although all four subclasses of IgG contain only a single N-glycosylation site in the Fc region with a highly similar amino acid sequence. Therefore, fine mapping of IgG glycosylation is necessary for understanding the IgG function and avoiding aberrant glycosylation in mAbs. However, site-specific and comprehensive N-glycosylation analysis of IgG subclasses still cannot be achieved by MS alone due to the partial sequence coverage and loss of connections among glycosylation of the protein sequence. We report here a chemical labeling strategy to improve the electron transfer dissociation efficiency in mass spectrometry analysis, which enables a 100% peptide sequence coverage of N-glycopeptides in all subclasses of IgG. Combined with high-energy collisional dissociation for the fragmentation of glycans, fine mapping of the N-glycosylation profile of IgG is achieved. This comprehensive glycosylation analysis strategy for the first time allows the discrimination of IgG3 and IgG4 intact N-glycopeptides with high similarity in sequence without the antibody-based pre-separation. Using this strategy, aberrant serum IgG N-glycosylation for four IgG subclasses associated with cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma was revealed. Moreover, this method identifies 5 times more intact glycopeptides from human serum than the native-ETD method, implying that the approach can also accommodate large-scale site-specific profiling of glycoproteomes.

### Keywords
Electron transfer dissociation (etd) mass spectrometry, Igg, Glycosylation, Chemical labeling, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Fudan University
fudan university

### Submitter
zhang lei

### Lab Head
Dr haojie lu
Fudan University


