### Accession
PXD014242

### Title
Potential proteins identification for stent restenosis induced by esophageal benign hyperplasia in esophageal cancer

### Description
This study was conducted to explore the potential proteins associated with esophagus benign hyperplasia induced by esophageal stents.

### Sample Protocol
From April to July in 2017, five patients with esophageal cancer admitted to our hospital were enrolled in the study. These patients were subjected to 125I particle esophagus stent placement for palliation of dysphagia due to esophagus cancer and presented with tissue hyperplasia around the perforation of the stent several months after stent placement. Five pairs of hyperplastic tissues and normal tissues (adjacent to the hyperplastic tissues) were collected during surgery and all five pairs were used for proteomics. Our study was approved by the ethics committee of our hospital. All patients provided informed consent before the experiments.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome DiscovererTM Software 2.1 interfaced with Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640). There were 71591 human protein sequences in Uniprot. Protein abundance was quantitatively analyzed. The quantitative data of protein abundance in the two groups of matched samples were normalized with loess method and then analyzed by paired samples t-test to screen for DE proteins. Proteins with p value < 0.05 were considered differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
This study was conducted to explore the potential genes and proteins associated with esophagus benign hyperplasia induced by esophageal stents. Five patients with esophageal cancer subjected to esophageal stent placement were enrolled in this study. Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) sequencing and tandem mass tag quantitative proteomics analysis were performed by using the collected hyperplastic samples and adjacent non-hyperplastic tissues. Differentially expressed (DE) RNAs and proteins were analyzed, followed by functional enrichment analysis, protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis, and competitive endogenous RNA (ceRNA) network construction. Venn analysis was performed to extract the overlaps between DE mRNAs and DE proteins and the expression correlations between DE mRNA and proteins were analyzed. Results showed that total 642 DE RNAs (457 mRNA and 185 lncRNAs) and 256 DE proteins were detected. DE mRNAs (such as <i>MAOB</i>, <i>SDR16C5</i>, and <i>FOSL1</i>) were enriched in oxidation-reduction process-associated functions. PPI network was comprised of 175 nodes and 425 edges. VEGFA was a significant node with the highest degree. LncRNA-mRNA network with three subnetworks (C1, C2, C3) was constructed for lncRNAs with more than 15 gene targets. RP11-58O9.2 was a significant lncRNA with the most target genes and RP11-667F14.1 regulated more than 20 targets. <i>FOSL1</i> was a common target of the two lncRNAs. Function analysis showed that DE lncRNAs were involved in the HTLV-I infection (RP11-58O9.2 and RP11-667F14.1) and IL-17 signaling pathways (RP11-5O24.1 and RP11-58O9.2). Total 11 DE mRNAs were overlapped with DE proteins, among which MAOB and SDR16C5 showed positive correlations between mRNA and protein expression. Function analysis showed that <i>MAOB</i> was enriched in oxidation-reduction process and its protein was closely related with response to lipopolysaccharide. <i>VEGFA</i>, <i>FOSL1</i>, <i>MAOB</i>, <i>SDR16C5</i>, RP11-58O9.2, RP11-667F14.1, and RP11-288A5.2 may be served as genetic targets for preventing stent restenosis in esophageal cancer.

### Keywords
Esophageal stents placement, Esophagus restenosis, Proteomics, Esophageal cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Imaging intervention, Tongren Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, No.1111 Xianxia Road, Changning District, Shanghai, 200336, China.
Shandong Universitu

### Submitter
Sun Tianyong

### Lab Head
Dr Aiwu Mao
Department of Imaging intervention, Tongren Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, No.1111 Xianxia Road, Changning District, Shanghai, 200336, China.


