### Accession
PXD030997

### Title
The venom profile of the solitary European carpenter bee Xylocopa violacea

### Description
We describe the first comprehensive venom profile of a solitary bee, the European carpenter bee Xylocopa violacea, by using a combined proteo-transcriptomic approach. Transcripts of the venom system are used as specific database to match peptide sequences from mass spectrometry analyses of venom from dissected venom glands and venom injected during a defensive sting. In our analyses, we only discuss the proteo-transcriptomically supported venom components and reveal a diverse venom profile with 43 different protein families of which 32 are identified in the injected venom.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to shotgun proteomics, the X. violacea venom samples (dissected and injected) were denatured, reduced, and alkylated. Each sample (~50 μg) was dissolved in 89 μl 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC), and cysteine residues were reduced by adding 1 μl 1 M DTT (30 min at 60 °C) and modified by adding 10 μl 0.5 M iodoacetamide (incubation for 30 min in the dark). Then 2 μg trypsin (Promega) were added in 100 mM TEABC and incubated overnight at 30 °C. The resulting peptides were purified and concentrated using OMIX Tips C18 reversed-phase resin (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The peptides were dehydrated in a vacuum centrifuge and analyzed by NanoLC-MS/MS. Samples were resuspended in 20 μl buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and 1 µl was loaded onto an analytical 25 cm reversed-phase column (Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18) with a 75 mm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on the Ultimate 3000 RSLC system coupled via a nano-electrospray source to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 6–40% gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) over 123 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Using data-dependent acquisition mode, full MS/MS scans (375–1500 m/z) were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z. For the full scans, 3 × 106 ions accumulated within a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The 12 most intense ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1 × 105 with a maximum injection time of 45 ms and were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation in the collision cell (normalized collision energy 28%) and detected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
All transcriptome assembly-based predicted ORFs were used as specific databases to identify peptides and proteins detected by mass spectrometry for the two dissected and injected venom samples using PEAKS Studio v8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON, Canada). Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification, with a maximum of three missed cleavages for trypsin digestion. Parent and fragment mass error tolerances were set at 5 ppm and 0.015 Da, respectively. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% and a unique peptide number ≥ 2 were used to filter out inaccurate proteins. A −10lgP value > 120 was used to estimate whether detected proteins were identified by a sufficient number of reliable peptides.  In order to identify more relevant sequences, the Spider algorithm (PEAKS Studio) was used to find additional mutations or to correct sequences. This algorithm corrects the sequences stored in transcriptomic databases with de novo sequences based on MS/MS spectra, allowing the detection of post-translational modifications (PTMs) and mutations. The minimum ion intensity for PTMs and mutations was set to 5%, and the ALC score was set to ≥ 90 for de novo sequences, leading to low precursor mass errors. Transcripts supported by proteomic data were manually filtered by excluding non-venom-related proteins and peptides, such as house-keeping and structural genes

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Melittin, Xylopin, Solitary bees, Hymenotera venom, Bee toxins

### Affiliations
LOEWE Center for Translational Biodiversity, Senckenberg Frankfurt and Insitute for Insectbiotechnology, University giessen
University of Montpellier, Institut des Biomolecules Max Mousseron

### Submitter
Bjoern von Reumont

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastien Dutertre
University of Montpellier, Institut des Biomolecules Max Mousseron


