### Accession
PXD013041

### Title
Study of the Salmonella enterica strains using the TMT-based proteomics

### Description
Tandem mass tags were used to performed the multiplexed proteomic study on the Salmonella enterica cell cultures corresponding to various strains of the bacterium.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were homogenized in 300 ul lysis buffer (50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Fluka, Sigma Aldrich) and 2% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)) with 0.1 mm silica beads using FastPrep®-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals, OH, USA). The beads were centrifuged at maximum speed for 15 min, the beads were washed with the lysis buffer and centrifuged at maximum speed again. The protein extracts were combined and protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) and the Benchmark Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, USA) with BSA solutions as standards. The samples were homogenized in 300 ul lysis buffer (50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Fluka, Sigma Aldrich) and 2% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)) with 0.1 mm silica beads using FastPrep®-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals, OH, USA). The beads were centrifuged at maximum speed for 15 min, the beads were washed with the lysis buffer and centrifuged at maximum speed again. The protein extracts were combined and protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) and the Benchmark Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, USA) with BSA solutions as standards.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Protein database for Salmonella typhimurium strain LT2 (March 2014, 4549 sequences) was downloaded from Uniprot. Mascot 2.3.2.0 (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. No missed cleavages were accepted, mono-oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, methylthiolation on cysteine and TMT-6 reagent modification on lysine and peptide N-terminus were set as a fixed modification. Percolator was used for the validation of identification results, target false discovery rate of 1% was used as a threshold to filter confident peptide identifications. Reporter ion intensities were quantified in MS3 spectra using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 at 0.003 Da mass tolerance with reporter absolute intensity threshold of 2000. The resulting ratios were normalised on the median protein value of 1.0 in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
We previously described how four deleterious synonymous mutations in the <i>Salmonella enterica rpsT</i> gene (encoding ribosomal protein S20) result in low S20 levels that can be compensated by mutations that restore [S20]. Here, we have further studied the cause for the deleterious effects of S20 deficiency and found that the S20 mutants were also deficient in four other 30S proteins (S1, S2, S12, and S21), which is likely due to an assembly defect of the S20 deficient 30S subunits. We examined the compensatory effect by six additional mutations affecting the global regulator Fis and the C-terminal domain of the &#x3b1; subunit of RNA polymerase (encoded by <i>rpoA</i>). The <i>fis</i> and <i>rpoA</i> mutations restored the S20 levels, concomitantly restoring the assembly defect and the levels of S1, S2, S12, and S21. These results illustrate the complexity of compensatory evolution and how the negative effects of deleterious mutations can be suppressed by a multitude of mechanisms. Additionally, we found that the mutations in <i>fis</i> and <i>rpoA</i> caused reduced expression of other ribosomal components. Notably, some of the <i>fis</i> mutations and the <i>rpoA</i> mutation corrected the fitness of the <i>rpsT</i> mutants to wild-type levels, although expression of other ribosomal components was reduced compared to wild-type. This finding raises new questions regarding the relation between translation capacity and growth rate.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Salmonella enterica, Tandem mass tag, Bacteria, Tmt

### Affiliations
Researcher, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Infection biology, antimicrobial resistance and immunology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Joakim Näsvall
Researcher, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Infection biology, antimicrobial resistance and immunology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden


