### Accession
PXD022731

### Title
Dysfunction of CEP128 impairs spermatogenesis but not ciliogenesis in humans and mice

### Description
The centrosome is a conserved eukaryotic organelle essential for reproductive process, and centrosomal proteins (CEP) are necessary for composition of the centrosome. However, few CEPs have been genetically linked to fertility, and the related molecular mechanisms remains mysterious. Here, we identified a new CEP, CEP128, which is functional in spermatogenesis, fertilization and embryonic development in both humans and mice. The variants of CEP128/Cep128 could lead to aberrant centrosome structures of the sperm inducing to anomalies in sperm morphology, count as well as motility, and further result in male infertility, but did not grossly affect ciliogenesis. Mechanistically, both loss and up-regulation of CEP128 could cause suppressed expressions of the genes involved in the spermatogenesis and fertilization phase. Altogether, our findings unprecedentedly unveil a crucial role of CEP128 in male fertility and provides new insight into the function of CEPs in human disease.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction： The sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation.) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  HPLC Fractionation  The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 8 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.  The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and Acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Centrosomal proteins are necessary components of the centrosome, a conserved eukaryotic organelle essential to the reproductive process. However, few centrosomal proteins have been genetically linked to fertility. Herein we identify a homozygous missense variant of CEP128 (c.665&#x2009;G&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;A [p.R222Q]) in two infertile males. Remarkably, male homozygous knock-in mice harboring the orthologous CEP128<sup>R222Q</sup> variant show anomalies in sperm morphology, count, and motility. Moreover, Cep128 knock-out mice manifest male infertility associated with disrupted sperm quality. We observe defective sperm flagella in both homozygous Cep128 KO and KI mice; the cilia development in other organs is normal-suggesting that CEP128 variants predominantly affected the ciliogenesis in the testes. Mechanistically, CEP128 is involved in male reproduction via regulating the expression of genes and/or the phosphorylation of TGF-&#x3b2;/BMP-signalling members during spermatogenesis. Altogether, our findings unveil a crucial role for CEP128 in male fertility and provide important insights into the functions of centrosomal proteins in reproductive biology.

### Keywords
Cep128; infertility; spermatogenesis; centrosome

### Affiliations
West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University
School of Life Sciences, Fudan University

### Submitter
Jichang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Shen
West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University


