### Accession
PXD012350

### Title
Peptidoglycan metabolite photoaffinity reporters reveal direct binding to intracellular pattern recognition receptors and Arf GTPases

### Description
Extensive structure-activity studies of iE-DAP and MDP have demonstrated their selective activation of NOD1- and NOD2-expressing cells, respectively. Nonetheless, the direct binding of iE-DAP and MDP to NOD1 and NOD2, respectively, as well as other proteins in mammalian cells has not been systematically investigated. To address the direct interaction of iE-DAP and MDP with NOD1 and NOD2 in living cells, we synthesized a series of peptidoglycan metabolite photoaffinity chemical reporters containing a diazirine for photocrosslinking in cells and an alkyne tag for bioorthogonal detection of covalently-labeled proteins. The analysis of these peptidoglycan metabolite photoaffinity reporters demonstrate that iE-DAP and MDP can directly bind to NOD1 and NOD2 in mammalian cells. The crosslinking of these peptidoglycan metabolite photoaffinity reporters only occur with active variants of NOD1 and NOD2. Beyond direct binding to NOD2, the active MDP photoaffinity reporter selectively crosslinked Arf GTPases in NOD2-expressing cells and did so most prominently with GTP-bound Arf6, revealing the Arf proteins as novel direct pattern recognition receptors. Additional labeling and co-precipitation experiments suggest that MDP induces a complex between NOD2 and GTP-Arf6. This study highlights the utility of peptidoglycan metabolite photoaffinity reporters for characterizing their direct binding to intracellular pattern recognition receptors and identifying unpredicted cellular cofactors. The applications of these microbial-specific metabolite reporters should enable the discovery of other receptors, transporters and regulatory enzymes in host cells and microbes.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were seeded in 10-cm plates and were grown in complete DMEM until 90% confluency. The cells were transfected with plasmids expressing HA-NOD2 (9 μg plasmid, 30 μL P3000 reagent, 30 μL Lipofectamine 3000 per plate). After 6 hours, cells were incubated with 20 μM x-alk-MDP-L,D 2 or 20 μM x-alk-MDP-D,L 3, and the cells were incubated for 16 hours. Cells were rinsed once with 6 mL PBS, and 6 mL PBS was added to each plate. Some plates were irradiated with UV light (365 nm) for 10 min on ice. Cells were lysed in SDS lysis buffer with 250 U/mL benzonase. Cell lysates (1.52 mg protein diluted to 900 μL with PBS) were reacted with 100 μL freshly premixed click chemistry reaction cocktail for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was terminated by methanol-chloroform precipitation. The air-dried protein pellets were dissolved in 187 μL SDS lysis buffer and diluted with 1313 μL HBS (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl). The protein solution was mixed with 35 μL NeutrAvidin bead suspension and rotated for 1 h at room temperature. The beads were washed with 1% SDS in PBS three times and 0.1% SDS once. Beads were resuspended in 21 μL SDS loading buffer and boiled. 20 μL sample was loaded per gel lane for separation by SDS-PAGE. SDS-PAGE gels were stained with Coomassie stain. Protein bands around 20 kDa were excised. Excised gels were washed with 200 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3/50% CH3CN for 30 min. Repeat the same washing step for 2 h. The excised gels were washed with CH3CN and then air-dired for 5-10 min. The excised gels were incubated with 100 μL trypsin solution at 0 °C for 15 min (1 μg trypsin/LysC per tube). The media was replaced by 120 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3. The mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. The reaction was stopped by adding 20 μL 1% formic acid. The tubes were shaken for 15 min at room temperature. The liquid containing digested and eluted peptides was transferred to another tube at 0 °C. The gel pieces were shaken with 50 μL extraction solution (60% CH3CN, 1% formic acid) for 15 min twice. The digestion and extraction solutions were combined and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were dissolved in 15 μL 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Extracted tryptic peptides were desalted on a trap column followed by separation on a 12 cm/75 μm reversed phase C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Each sample was subjected to a 60-min separation using a linear gradient of 5-40% B to 40% B in 33 min (A: water/0.1% formic acid, B: acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The liquid chromatography setup (Dionex, Boston, MA, USA) was connected to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in top-8-HCD-mode with MS spectra measured at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400.

### Data Protocol
Acquired tandem MS spectra were extracted using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.8 and compared against Uniprot complete human database and processed using Perseus. Peptides fulfilling a calculated 1% false threshold were reported. Additionally, for the LD-probe labeled samples vs. DL-probe labeled samples (or UV-irradiated samples vs untreated samples), absent values were imputed at 0. Proteins were considered a true hit if the false discovery rate was lower than 5% and the mean ratio of the compared samples was greater than 5 with P < 0.03 as determined by the Student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
The peptidoglycan fragments &#x3b3;-d-glutamyl- meso-diaminopimelic acid (iE-DAP) and muramyl-dipeptide (MDP) are microbial-specific metabolites that activate intracellular pattern recognition receptors and stimulate immune signaling pathways. While extensive structure-activity studies have demonstrated that these bacterial cell wall metabolites trigger NOD1- and NOD2-dependent signaling, their direct binding to these innate immune receptors or other proteins in mammalian cells has not been established. To characterize these fundamental microbial metabolite-host interactions, we synthesized a series of peptidoglycan metabolite photoaffinity reporters and evaluated their cross-linking to NOD1 and NOD2 in mammalian cells. We show that active iE-DAP and MDP photoaffinity reporters selectively cross-linked NOD1 and NOD2, respectively, and not their inactive mutants. We also discovered MDP reporter cross-linking to Arf GTPases, which interacted most prominently with GTP-bound Arf6 and coimmunoprecipitated with NOD2 upon MDP stimulation. Notably, MDP binding to NOD2 and Arf6 was abrogated with loss-of-function NOD2 mutants associated with Crohn's disease. Our studies demonstrate peptidoglycan metabolite photoaffinity reporters can capture their cognate immune receptors in cells and reveal unpredicted ligand-induced interactions with other cellular cofactors. These photoaffinity reporters should afford useful tools to discover and characterize other peptidoglycan metabolite-interacting proteins.

### Keywords
Hek293t, Mdp, Gel-based proteomics, Nod2

### Affiliations
The Rockefeller University

### Submitter
Yen-Chih Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Howard Hang
The Rockefeller University


