### Accession
PXD027954

### Title
Substrate profiling of mitochondrial caseinolytic protease P via a site-specific photocrosslinking approach

### Description
The function of proteases is mainly determined by the substrates they are processing. However, substrate identification remains a challenging task. Here, we used genetic code expansion to incorporate a diazirine-lysine amino acid (DiazK) at selected positions of mitochondrial caseinolytic protease P (ClpP) in mammalian cells and determined its substrate scope by proteomic analyses after UV-light dependent photocrosslink. The results confirm its major involvement in maintaining the overall mitochondrial protein homeostasis as evident from alternative approaches. Additionally, novel putative substrates were identified revealing the highly complementary nature of this approach. Furthermore, this allows for the identification of changing substrate dynamics in an unbiased manner. Induction of oxidative stress with rotenone followed by identification of unique proteins corroborate its role in mitochondrial stress response. We hypothesize, that the oxidative stress is counteracted by processing proteins, which are involved in respiratory chain complex proteins synthesis and maturation as well as catabolic enzymes respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were thawed on ice, resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2 · 6H2O, 1% (v/v) 4-Nonylphenyl-polyethylene glycol (NP-40), 5% (v/v) glycerol, pH = 7.4 at 4°C) and incubated for 30 min at 4°C. Afterwards membranes and cell debris were separated by centrifugation (21,100 g, 20 min, 4°C). For protein enrichment, 30 μL monoclonal HA-antibody agarose beads suspension (A2095, isotype IgG1, Merck) per replicate in LoBind Eppendorf tubes were equilibrated with 1 mL wash buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% (v/v) NP-40, 5% (v/v) glycerol, pH = 7.4 at 4°C) and centrifuged at 1,000 g for 1 min at 4°C. 500 μL cytosolic fraction were incubated with equilibrated beads for 3 h at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Afterwards beads were centrifuged at 1,000 g for 1 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and beads were washed two times each with 1 mL wash buffer and two times each with 1 mL basic buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH = 7.4 at 4°C) to remove unspecifically bound proteins.  Digestion and reduction of enriched proteins was performed by addition of 25 μL digestion buffer I (5 ng/μl trypsin (in 50 mM acetic acid), 50 mM Tris/HCl, 2 M urea, 1 mM DTT (freshly prepared and diluted 1:1,000 from 1 M stock, pH = 8.0) and incubated for 30’. Afterwards, alkylation of free cysteines and further digestion was conducted by addition of 100 μl digestion buffer II (5.5 mM IAA -  freshly prepared and diluted 1:100 from 550 mM stock, 50 mM Tris/HCl, 2 M urea, pH = 8.0), following incubation for 16 – 19 h at 25°C with continuous mixing at 650 rpm in a thermoshaker (Thermomixer comfort 5355, Eppendorf).  Digestion was stopped by adjusting the pH to 2 - 3 via addition of 17.5 μl 10% (v/v) FA in water. Peptide solutions were desalted by stage tips with two-layered C18 material (SDC-XC, 3M) according to a published protocol. In brief, per replicate two layers of C18 material were packed into a 200 μl pipet tip and washed with 70 μl MeOH, 70 μl 80% (v/v) MeCN, 0.5% (v/v) FA and 3x 70 μl 0.5% (v/v) FA (centrifugation: 1,000 g, 1-2’, r.t.). Samples were loaded and centrifuged at 1,000 g for 1-2’ at r.t. Beads were washed with 70 μl 0.5% (v/v) FA and the washing solution was also loaded onto the C18 material. Samples were desalted by washing two times with 70 μl 0.5% (v/v) FA. Elution of peptides was conducted with 2x 30 μl 80% (v/v) MeCN, 0.5% (v/v) FA into fresh LoBind Eppendorf tubes followed by speedvac assisted solvent removal. Samples were stored at -80°C until further use. For LC-MS/MS measurement sample peptides were dissolved in 25 μl 1% (v/v) aqueous FA and sonicated 3x 5’ with centrifugation for 1’ at 17,000 g in between. Dissolved peptides were filtered using 0.22 μm Ultrafree-MC® centrifugal filters (UFC30GVNB, Merck) pre-equilibrated with 300 μl 1% (v/v) FA. Filtrates were transferred to MS-vials prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide samples from substrate enrichment experiments were analyzed with an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex) using an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 (75 μm ID x 2 cm) trap and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 (75 μm ID x 50 cm) separation column in EASY-spray setting coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). 1-5 μl peptide sample were loaded on the trap and washed with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, then transferred to the analytical column (buffer A: H2O with 0.1% (v/v) FA, buffer B: MeCN with 0.1% (v/v) FA, flow as indicated in the table below, gradient: to 5% buffer B in 7 min, from 5% to 22% buffer B in 105 min, then to 32% buffer B in 10 min, to 90% buffer B in 10 min and hold at 90% buffer B for 10 min, then to 5% buffer B in 0.1 min and hold 5% buffer B for 9.9 min) and ionized by nanospray ionization (NSI) with capillary temperature of 275 °C. Spray voltage was applied as indicated in the table below. Orbitrap Fusion was operated in a TOP speed data dependent mode. Master scan acquisition was carried out in the orbitrap at a resolution of R = 120,000, an AGC target of 2.0e5 in a scan range of 300 - 1500 m/z and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic Peak Determination was set to “Peptide” and dynamic exclusion was enabled with dynamic exclusion duration set to 60 s with a mass tolerance (low/high) of 10 ppm. Precursors with a charge state of 2 - 7 and intensities greater than 5.0e3 were submitted to fragmentation by higher collisional dissociation (HCD). Isolation of precursors was performed in the Quadrupole with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z. Detection was carried out in the ion trap to an AGC target of 1.0e4 with first mass set to 120 m/z, Ion Trap Scan Rate set to “Rapid” and “Inject Ions for All Available Parallelizable Time” set to true. Maximum Ion Injection Time was set to 100 ms and peptide fragments were generated by HCD with a collision energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
MS-data were processed using Andromeda search engine of MaxQuant (MQ) Software (version 1.6.0.1). For identification of peptides, MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot reference proteome (taxon identifier 9606, canonical version, without isoforms, downloaded 2017/07/18). MaxQuant settings were largely set on default with Label-free quantification (LFQ) enabled and Trypsin as digestion enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications with a maximum number of 5 modifications per peptide and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was used as fixed modification. Second peptide search was enabled as well as match between runs with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. For identification false discovery rate on the PSM, protein and site level were set to 0.01. MaxQuant data were further statistically processed with Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3). A ProteinGroups table was loaded into the program with LFQ intensities of all replicates as main column. Rows were filtered based on categorical columns omitting values that met the criterium of “reverse”, “potential contaminant” and “only identified by site”. After log2 transformation, matrices were further filtered based on valid values. Proteins with less than 50% of valid values in LFQ intensity compared to all replicates were excluded. Remaining missing values were inserted by imputation from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.2 - 1.8). Categorical annotation of UV-irradiated (+UV) and non-treated (-UV) samples was performed before data were analyzed by two-sided student’s t-test with -UV as single control group with Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate correction (FDR 0.05). Additionally, GO-term annotations with GOBP, GOMF and GOCC, downloaded from Uniprot were added.

### Publication Abstract
Approaches for profiling protease substrates are critical for defining protease functions, but remain challenging tasks. We combine genetic code expansion, photocrosslinking and proteomics to identify substrates of the mitochondrial (mt) human caseinolytic protease P (hClpP). Site-specific incorporation of the diazirine-bearing amino acid DiazK into the inner proteolytic chamber of hClpP, followed by UV-irradiation of cells, allows to covalently trap substrate proteins of hClpP and to substantiate hClpP's major involvement in maintaining overall mt homeostasis. In addition to confirming many of the previously annotated hClpP substrates, our approach adds a diverse set of new proteins to the hClpP interactome. Importantly, our workflow allows identifying substrate dynamics upon application of external cues in an unbiased manner. Identification of unique hClpP-substrate proteins upon induction of mt oxidative stress, suggests that hClpP counteracts oxidative stress by processing of proteins that are involved in respiratory chain complex synthesis and maturation as well as in catabolic pathways.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mtupr, Photoaffinity crosslinking, Clpxp, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
TU Munich
Department of Chemistry
Chair of Organic Chemistry 2
Lichtenbergstraße 4
85748 Garching
Germany
Technical University of Munich,  Department of Chemistry, Chair of Organic Chemistry 2, Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Gronauer

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Axel Sieber
Technical University of Munich,  Department of Chemistry, Chair of Organic Chemistry 2, Germany


