### Accession
PXD012805

### Title
Diverse Compounds from Pleuromutilin Lead to a Thioredoxin Inhibitor and Inducer of Ferroptosis

### Description
The chemical diversification of natural products provides a robust and general method for creation of stereochemically complex and structurally diverse small molecules. The resulting compounds have physicochemical traits different from those in most screening collections, and as such are a rich source for biological discovery. Herein, we subject the terpene natural product pleuromutilin to reaction sequences focused on creating ring system diversity in few synthetic steps. This effort resulted in the synthesis of multiple compounds with previously unreported ring systems, providing a set of novel structurally diverse and highly complex compounds suitable for screening in a variety of different settings. Biological evaluation of these compounds identified the novel compound ferroptocide, a compound that rapidly and robustly induces ferroptotic death of cancer cells. Target identification efforts and CRISPR KO studies reveal that ferroptocide is an inhibitor of thioredoxin, a key component of thioredoxin antioxidant system in the cell.  Ferroptocide shows the ability to positively modulate the immune system in a murine model of breast cancer and will be a useful tool to study the ability of pro-ferroptotic agents to synergize with the immune system for treatment of cancer.

### Sample Protocol
ES-2 and HCT 116 (20 x 106 cells/flask) were platted in T175 flasks and treated with DMSO or 20 μM ferroptocide for 1 hr followed by treatment with 20 μM P29 for 1 hr. Cells were lysed via sonication (6500g, 4 min) in DPBS and the soluble proteome was isolated after ultrasonication (45000g, 45 min). Bradford assay was used to determine protein concentration. The soluble protein lysates in DPBS (pH 7.4) (500 μL, 2 mg/mL) were treated with biotin-azide (100 μM, 50X stock in DMSO), TCEP (1 mM, 50X fresh stock in water), TBTA ligand (100 μM, 17X stock in DMSO:t-butanol = 1:4), and copper(II) sulfate (1 mM, 50X stock in water) followed by incubation at r.t. for 1 hr. Samples were centrifuged (6500 g, 4 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant was discarded. The pellets were resuspended in cold methanol by sonication (2x) and then were solubilized in DPBS containing 1.2% SDS via sonication and heating (90 °C, 5 min). A final SDS concentration of 0.2% was achieved after addition of 5 mL of DPBS to the SDS-solubilized proteome samples. The solution was incubated overnight at 4 °C with 100 μL of streptavidin-agarose beads (ThermoFisher, washed 3X with DPBS to remove storage buffer). Samples were rotated at 22 °C for 2 hr before being washed by 5 mL 0.2 % SDS/DPBS, 3 X 5 mL DPBS, and 3 X 5 mL water. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation (1400 X g, 3 min) between washes.  On Bead trypsin digestion  The washed beads were suspended in 500 µL of 6 M urea/DPBS and 10 mM DTT (from 20X stock in water) and heated for 20 min on a 65 °C heat block. Upon addition of iodoacetamide (20 mM from 50X stock in water), samples were allowed to react at 37 °C for 30 min while shaking. Following reduction and alkylation, the beads were pelleted by centrifugation and resuspended in 200 μL of 2 M urea/DPBS, 1 mM CaCl2 (100X stock in water), and sequencing-grade trypsin (2 μg). The bead digestion occured overnight at 37 °C while shaking. Next day, the beads were pelleted by centrifugation and washed with 2 X 50 μL water. The washes were combined with the supernatant from the trypsin digestion step, and after addition of formic acid (15 μL) to each sample, they were stored at -20 °C until mass spectrometry analysis.  Liquid Chromatography- Mass spectrometry Analysis LC/LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC. Peptide digests were pressure loaded onto a 250 μm fused silica desalting column packed with 4 cm of Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex). The peptides were eluted onto a biphasic column (100 μm fused silica with a 5 μ, tip, packed with 10 cm C18 and 4 cm Partisphere strong cation exchange resin (SCX, Whatman) using a gradient 5-100% Buffer B in Buffer A (Buffer A: 95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The peptides were then eluted from the SCX onto the C18 resin and into the mass spectrometer using 4 salt steps previously described.4 The flow rate through the column was set to ~0.25 μL/min and the spray voltage was set to 2.75 kV. One full MS scan (FTMS) (400-1800 MW) was followed by 8 data dependent scans (ITMS) of the nth most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
The tandem MS data were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm using a concatenated target/decoy variant of the human UniProt database. A static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was specified to account for alkylation by iodoacetamide. SEQUEST output files were filtered using DTASelect.

### Publication Abstract
The chemical diversification of natural products provides a robust and general method for the creation of stereochemically rich and structurally diverse small molecules. The resulting compounds have physicochemical traits different from those in most screening collections, and as such are an excellent source for biological discovery. Herein, we subject the diterpene natural product pleuromutilin to reaction sequences focused on creating ring system diversity in few synthetic steps. This effort resulted in a collection of compounds with previously unreported ring systems, providing a novel set of structurally diverse and highly complex compounds suitable for screening in a variety of different settings. Biological evaluation identified the novel compound ferroptocide, a small molecule that rapidly and robustly induces ferroptotic death of cancer cells. Target identification efforts and CRISPR knockout studies reveal that ferroptocide is an inhibitor of thioredoxin, a key component of the antioxidant system in the cell. Ferroptocide positively modulates the immune system in a murine model of breast cancer and will be a useful tool to study the utility of pro-ferroptotic agents for treatment of cancer.

### Keywords
Ferroptosis, Thioredoxin

### Affiliations
Boston College
Department of Chemistry, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA

### Submitter
Eranthie Weerapana

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Department of Chemistry, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA


