### Accession
PXD024519

### Title
XL-MS analysis of human tyrosine hydroxylase

### Description
Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) is a highly regulated enzyme that catalyses the rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis of dopamine (DA) and other catecholamines. Mutations and dysfunction in this enzyme lead to DA deficiency and parkinsonisms of different severity. An understanding of TH deficiency at the level of structure and stability has been lacking to date, as only structures of truncated TH forms have been available. Here, we used cryoEM and XL-MS to determine the high-resolution structure of full-length human tetrameric TH in the absence and presence of the end-product and feedback inhibitor DA bound to the active site

### Sample Protocol
Apo-TH and TH(DA) were subjected to chemical crosslinking coupled with mass spectrometry (XL-MS). Approximately 10 μg of apo-TH and TH(DA) were incubated with 3 mM of the crosslinker Bis(sulfosuccinimidyl suberate) (BS3) in 50 mM Na-Hepes pH 7, 200 mM NaCl for 40 min at RT. The reaction was quenched for 15 min at RT by adding 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.0. Purified BS3-crosslinked proteins were incubated in Laemmli sample buffer (0.02% [w/v] bromophenol blue, 2% [w/v] SDS, 10% [v/v] glycerol, 60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8) for 5 min at 96 °C and loaded onto a 12% polyacrylamide gel. Electrophoresis was stopped as soon as the protein sample reached the bottom region of 24 the resolving gel. The gel was then stained with Quick Coomassie (Generon) and the coomassie-stained band was excised and subjected to automated reduction, alkylation with iodoacetamide and trypsin digestion in a Proteineer DP robot (Bruker Daltonics). The resulting peptide mixture was speed-vac dried and re-dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using a nano-LC Ultra HPLC (Eksigent, Framingham, MA) coupled online to a 5600 triple TOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) through a nanospray III ion source (AB Sciex) equipped with a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 μm x 12 cm; New Objective, Woburn, MA). Peptides were fractionated at a flow-rate of 0.250 ml/min at 50 °C under gradient elution conditions. The ion source was operated in positive ionization mode at 150 °C with a potential difference of 2300 V.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, raw MS data was searched against a custom-made database containing the sequences of the proteins in each sample. The MS/MS ion search was performed with Stavrox 3.6.655. Search parameters were set as follows: trypsin as enzyme allowing 2 and 3 missed cleavages for R and K, respectively, BS3 as crosslinker, MS tolerance of 20 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 40 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Peptide identifications were filtered at a FDR < 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis of dopamine (DA) and other catecholamines, and its dysfunction leads to DA deficiency and parkinsonisms. Inhibition by catecholamines and reactivation by S40 phosphorylation are key regulatory mechanisms of TH activity and conformational stability. We used Cryo-EM to determine the structures of full-length human TH without and with DA, and the structure of S40 phosphorylated TH, complemented with biophysical and biochemical characterizations and molecular dynamics simulations. TH presents a tetrameric structure with dimerized regulatory domains that are separated 15&#x2009;&#xc5; from the catalytic domains. Upon DA binding, a 20-residue &#x3b1;-helix in the flexible N-terminal tail of the regulatory domain is fixed in the active site, blocking it, while S40-phosphorylation forces its egress. The structures reveal the molecular basis of the inhibitory and stabilizing effects of DA and its counteraction by S40-phosphorylation, key regulatory mechanisms for homeostasis of DA and TH.

### Keywords
Dopamine, Bs3, Xl-ms, Tyrosine hydroxylase

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit. Spanish National Biotechnology Centre.  CNB-CSIC
Proteomics Unit - Dpt. of Macromolecular Structures - Spanish National Biotechnolgy Centre (CNB-CSIC)

### Submitter
Miguel Marcilla

### Lab Head
Dr Fernando Corrales
Proteomics Unit. Spanish National Biotechnology Centre.  CNB-CSIC


