### Accession
PXD025295

### Title
Proteomic analysis of S-nitrosylation in HUVECs

### Description
HUVECs stimulated with HG+oxLDL or Mannitol+nLDL were subjected to the biotin-switch assay to enrich the S-nitrosylated proteins, the S-nitrosylated proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and gels were silver stained. Mass spectrometry was conducted to determine proteins with S-nitrosylation.

### Sample Protocol
HUVECs treated with Mannitol+nLDL or HG+oxLDL were blocked with N-ethylmaleimide and labeled with biotin-maleimide. Then the biotinylated proteins were digested by trypsin (trypsin: protein=1:50) for 16 h and purified with streptavidin-agarose for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis of SNO-peptides was carried out on a NanoLC system equipped with a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the human proteome sequences obtained from the UniProt database using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8). False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated using the target-decoy strategy, and FDR cut-offs were set to 0.05 for sites, peptides and proteins. Enzyme specificity was considered to be full cleavage by trypsin, and two maximum missed cleavage sites were permitted. The minimum required peptide length was set to 6 residues.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
S-nitrosylation, Huvecs, Oxldl, Mass spectrometry, Hg

### Affiliations
Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Shanshan Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Ji
Nanjing Medical University


