### Accession
PXD027145

### Title
Proteome and phosphoproteome of hippocampus after focal cerebral ischemia 2 h in mice

### Description
We obtained the profiles of neuronal phosphoproteome after cerebral ischemia onset by isolating mice hippocampus. Hippocampus combined from either ten sham or ten focal cerebral ischemia 2 h mice were lysed, digested, labeled with different TMT tags, then pooled and analyzed by LC/LC-MS/MS. Five percent of the pool was used for whole proteome analysis, and the remaining 95% was subjected to phosphoproteome profiling. In total, we quantified 5,174 proteins and 9,062 phosphopeptides. Interesting, 21 proteins were upregulated and 7 proteins were downregulated in hippocampus lysates of cerebral ischemia 2 h relative to sham base on fold change. S100a9, Alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein (Ahsg), Fibrinogen beta chain (Fga) and Complement Component C3(c3) are the top significantly changed, which were highly consistent with previous reports in cerebral ischemia injury. Using wolfpsort software to analysis the Subcellular Location, 57% of detected proteins were location to extracellular, 15% were cytoplasmic protein, another 11% were transport to nucleus, and the others were location to plasma membranes (10%), mitochondria (4%) and endoplasmic reticulum (3%).  Moreover,184 phosphorylation sites of 135 proteins were upregulated and 689 phosphorylation sites of 420 proteins were downregulated in hippocampus during cerebral ischemia 2 h compare with sham operation. Employing wolfpsort software analysis the subcellular location, 50% of phosphorylated proteins were location to nucleus, 26% were cytoplasmic protein, another 16% were transport to plasma membranes, and the others were location to mitochondria (4%), extracellular (3%) and cytoskeleton (1%). Motif analysis showed that 85% were belongs to serine-type phosphorylation, about 14 were threonine-type phosphorylation and 1% were tyrosine-type phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Focal Cerebral Ischemia Model Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by intraluminal middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Briefly, mice were anesthetized with 5% isoflurane and maintained with 1% isoflurane (R511-22, RWD Life Science, Shen Zhen, China) in an oxygen/air mixture by using a gas anesthesia mask (R580S, RWD Life Science). The left common carotid artery (CCA) and the external carotid artery (ECA) were exposed by a ventral midline neck incision and clipped. The ECA was ligated with 5-0 silk suture, and a 2-cm long silicon-rubber-coated monofilament (MSMC24B104PK50, RWD Life Science) was advanced from the ECA through the internal carotid artery (ICA) up to the level of the anterior cerebral artery. The suture was inserted 9–11 mm from the bifurcation of CCA to occlude the middle cerebral artery (MCA) to induce permanent cerebral ischemia. The sham-operated animals were treated identically, except that the middle cerebral artery was not occluded after the neck incision.  Protein Extraction the sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.

### Data Protocol
TMT/iTRAQ Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Affinity Enrichment To enrich phosphorylation modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.  Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Mouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebral stroke is one of the leading causes of death in adults worldwide. However, the molecular mechanisms of stroke-induced neuron injury are not fully understood. Here, we obtained phosphoproteomic and proteomic profiles of the acute ischemic hippocampus by LC-MS/MS analysis. Quantitative phosphoproteomic analyses revealed that the dysregulated phosphoproteins were involved in synaptic components and neurotransmission. We further demonstrated that phosphorylation of Synaptotagmin-1 (Syt1) at the Thr112 site in cultured hippocampal neurons aggravated oxygen-glucose deprivation-induced neuronal injury. Immature neurons with low expression of Syt1 exhibit slight neuronal injury in a cerebral ischemia model. Administration of the Tat-Syt1<sup>T112A</sup> peptide protects neurons against cerebral ischemia-induced injury in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. Surprisingly, potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily KQT member 2 (Kcnq2) interacted with Syt1 and Annexin A6 (Anxa6) and alleviated Syt1-mediated neuronal injury upon oxygen-glucose deprivation treatment. These results reveal a mechanism underlying neuronal injury and may provide new targets for neuroprotection after acute cerebral ischemia onset.

### Keywords
Proteome ; phosphoproteome; hippocampus; cerebral ischemia

### Affiliations
College of Biology, Hunan University, China
College of Biology, Hunan University

### Submitter
Wei Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Hai jun TU
College of Biology, Hunan University, China


