### Accession
PXD037653

### Title
Fraisinib: a calix[4]pyrrole derivative effective in reducing NSCLC tumor in-vivo, is found to act as ligand of the Glycine-tRNA Synthase (GARS1), a new molecular target in oncology.

### Description
Adopting a multi-proteomic approach, we evaluated the possible involvement of GARS1 in the regulation of phenotypic alterations that reduced in vivo tumorigenicity of A549 cells exposed to Fraisinib over time. For this purpose, we performed a differential proteomic analysis followed by the generation of functional networks and enrichment analysis, and then we compared the obtained results after including the known GARS1 interactors identified in A549 cell line.

### Sample Protocol
We treated the human lung adenocarcinoma derived A549 cell line with 5μM Fraisinib for 24, 48 and 72h and we evaluated the differential expression of proteins by Mass Spectrometry (MS). Tandem mass analysis of tryptic digests has been performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano chromatography system (Thermo Scientific Instrument), equipped with a PepMap RSLC18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific Instrument) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and a temperature of 60°C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% v/v formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 80% ACN, 20% H2O and 0.08% v/v formic acid. The following 105 min gradient was selected: 0.0-3.0 min isocratic 2% B; 3.0-7.0 min 7% B; 7.0-65.0 min 30% B; 65.0-78.0 min 45% B; 78.0-83.0 min 80% B; 83.0-85.0 isocratic 80% B; 85.0-85.1 2% B and finally 85.1-105.0 isocratic 2% B. After separation, the flow has been sent directly to an Easyspray source connected to an Exactive Plus Orbitrap Q mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific Instrument). The software Xcalibur (version 4.1, Thermo Scientific Instrument) was used for operating the UHPLC/HR-MS. MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 between 200 and 2,000 m/z, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3.0E6 and a maximum injection time (maxIT) of 100 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, an AGC target of 1.0E5 and a maxIT of 50 ms. A quadrupole isolation window of 2.0 m/z was used, and HCD was performed using 30 normalized collision energy (NCE).

### Data Protocol
Data from mass spectrometer in *.raw format was processed with ProteomeDiscoverer® software version 2.4.1.15 using a workflow adapted to LTQ ORBITRAP label-free quantification. Briefly, the software divides the data analysis in two steps: Processing and Consensus.  In the Processing step it was established the database for PMSs identification in MS/MS spectra and concatenated decoy (Homo sapiens - sp_canonical v2022-03-02, Target FDR strict = 0.01, Target FDR relaxed = 0.05 for proteins, peptides and PSMs), static modification (Carbamidomethyl/+57.021Da on C) and dynamic modifications (Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M); Phospho / +79.966 Da (S, T, Y)), as well as identification engines (MS Amanda 2.0 [3_PB], Sequest HT® and tolerances (Precursor mass tolerance=10ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance =0.02Da).  In the consensus step Precursors abundance was calculated by intensity, using Unique+Razor peptides and considering protein for peptide uniqueness. Peptide’s normalization (based on total peptide amount, scaling on all average), peptide filters (high confidence, minimum length=6) and proteins quantification (by summed abundances, pairwise ratio based, t-test background based) were also assessed in this step using IMP-apQuant node.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background and purpose:</b> Lung cancer is the leading cause of death in both men and women, constituting a major public health problem worldwide. Non-small-cell lung cancer accounts for 85%-90% of all lung cancers. We propose a compound that successfully fights tumor growth <i>in vivo</i> by targeting the enzyme GARS1. <b>Experimental approach:</b> We present an in-depth investigation of the mechanism through which Fraisinib [meso-(p-acetamidophenyl)-calix(4)pyrrole] affects the human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cell line. In a xenografted model of non-small-cell lung cancer, Fraisinib was found to reduce tumor mass volume without affecting the vital parameters or body weight of mice. Through a computational approach, we uncovered that glycyl-tRNA synthetase is its molecular target. Differential proteomics analysis further confirmed that pathways regulated by Fraisinib are consistent with glycyl-tRNA synthetase inhibition. <b>Key results:</b> Fraisinib displays a strong anti-tumoral potential coupled with limited toxicity in mice. Glycyl-tRNA synthetase has been identified and validated as a protein target of this compound. By inhibiting GARS1, Fraisinib modulates different key biological processes involved in tumoral growth, aggressiveness, and invasiveness. <b>Conclusion and implications:</b> The overall results indicate that Fraisinib is a powerful inhibitor of non-small-cell lung cancer growth by exerting its action on the enzyme GARS1 while displaying marginal toxicity in animal models. Together with the proven ability of this compound to cross the blood-brain barrier, we can assess that Fraisinib can kill two birds with one stone: targeting the primary tumor and its metastases "in one shot." Taken together, we suggest that inhibiting GARS1 expression and/or GARS1 enzymatic activity may be innovative molecular targets for cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Human, Gars1, Chemioterapy, Lung, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Genova
IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genova, Italy

### Submitter
Gabriela Coronel Vargas

### Lab Head
Dr Camillo Rosano
IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genova, Italy


