### Accession
PXD011510

### Title
Critical role of the UBL-domain in stimulating the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of UHRF1 towards chromatin

### Description
The RING E3 ubiquitin ligase UHRF1 controls DNA methylation through its ability to target the maintenance DNA methyltransferase DNMT1 to newly replicated chromatin. DNMT1 recruitment relies on ubiquitylation of histone H3 by UHRF1, however, how UHRF1 deposits ubiquitin onto the histone is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that the ubiquitin-like domain (UBL) of UHRF1 is essential for RINGmediated H3 ubiquitylation. Using chemical crosslinking and mass spectrometry, biochemical assays and recombinant chromatin substrates we show that the UBL participates in structural rearrangements of UHRF1 upon binding to chromatin and the E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzyme UbcH5a/UBE2D1. Similar to ubiquitin, the UBL exerts its effects through a hydrophobic patch that contacts a regulatory surface on the “backside” of the E2 to stabilise the E2-E3-chromatin complex. Our analysis of the enzymatic mechanism of UHRF1 uncovers an unexpected function of the UBLdomain and defines a new role for this domain in DNMT1-dependent inheritance of DNA methylation.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking-MS experiments:  Samples were incubated for 15 min at RT in 10 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT. A 1 mg aliquot of isotopically-coded BS3 d0/d12 crosslinker (Creative Molecules, 001SS) was reconstituted to 25 mM in water and immediately added to the mixture in equimolar amounts to the number of moles of lysine residues present in the sample. The crosslinking reaction was incubated for 30 min at 25°C with mild agitation and the reaction was quenched with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 20 min at 25°C. The samples were reduced in volume in a speedvac and resuspended in 50 ul 7.2 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated for 15 min at 25°C. Cysteines were reduced with 5 mM DTTfor 1 hr at 51°C and protected with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, I1149-25G) for 45 min in the dark at 25°C. The reaction was quenched with DTT and urea was diluted to < 1 M with 50 mM NH4HCO3 before adding MS-grade trypsin (Promega, V5113) in a ratio of 1:25 (trypsin:protein) and incubated for 16 hr at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by the addition of acetic acid (2.5% final concentration, v/v) and peptides were purified using C18 stage tips (Glygen). Peptides were eluted in 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and dried and stored at -20°C. Eluted peptides were analysed by the LTQ Orbitrap Velos operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 30,000 resolution (at m/z 200), followed by ion trap CID (collisional induced dissociation) of the top 10 most abundant ions. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets set to 1e6 and 1e4 for a maximum injection time of 500 ms and 100 ms, respectively. A survey scan m/z range 350 – 1800 was used, with a normalised collision energy set to 35%, charge state rejection enabled for +1 ions and a minimum threshold for triggering fragmentation of 500 counts.  LC-MS/MS Experiments 1 (b015p026) and 3 (b015p056):  Dried digested peptides were solubilised in 15 ul 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and clarified solution was transferred to auto sampler vials for LC-MS analysis. Peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY-Spray source. 5 ul sample in technical duplicate was loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100 um x 2 cm) at 8 ul/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA, 5% DMSO. Peptides were eluted on-line to an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap C18, 75 um x 50 cm). Peptides were separated using a ramped 120 min gradient from 4-70% buffer B (buffer B is 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO). Eluted peptides were analysed by the Velos operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 70,000 resolution (at m/z 200) followed by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) of the top 12 most abundant ions at a resolution of 17,500. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets set to 1e6 and 1e5 for a maximum injection time of 50 ms and 110 ms, respectively. A survey scan m/z range of 350 – 1800 m/z was used, with a normalised collision energy set to 27%, underfill ratio – 1%, charge state exclusion enabled for unassigned, +1, +8 and >+8 ions.    LC-MS/MS Experiment 2 (b015p047):  Dried digested peptides were solubilised in 15 ul 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and clarified solution was transferred to auto sampler vials for LC-MS analysis. Peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a Proxeon nano-spray source. 5 ul sample in technical duplicate was loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100 um x 2 cm) at 8 ul/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted on-line to an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap C18, 75 um x 50 cm). Peptides were separated using a stepped 90 min gradient, 4-25% buffer B for 60 min, 25-65% buffer B for 30 min (buffer B is 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). For experiment 3, a stepped 60 min gradient was used, 4-25% buffer B for 45 min, 25-45% buffer B for 15 min. Eluted peptides were analysed by the LTQ Orbitrap XL operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survery scan at 30,000 resolution (at m/z 200), followed by ion Trap CID (collisional induced dissociation) of the top 6 most abundant ions. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets set to 1e6 and 1e4 for a maximum injection time of 500 ms and 100 ms, respectively. A survey scan m/z range 350 – 1800 was used, with a normalised collision energy set to 35%, charge state rejection enabled for +1 ions and a minimum threshold for triggering fragmentation of 500 counts.

### Data Protocol
In vitro ubiquitylation assays LC-MS/MS:  For identification of ubiquitylated substrates three different experiments were carried out. In the first experiment (b015p026), two E3 assays were set up using wild type using UHRF1deltaMW, unmodified chromatin substrate (12x187bp) and ~1/5 of the quenched reaction was run on a 15% SDS-PAGE gel. Coomassie-stained bands at 25 kDa and ~35 kDa were cut out, destained and treated with two consecutive rounds of propionylation with propionic anhydride (Sigma, 240311) followed by in-gel trypsin digestion overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted with acid and analysed by LC/MS-MS. Experiment number 3 (b015p056) was carried out in a similar manner except UHRF1WT was used these assays and bands were cut out at 25 kDa, ~35 kDa and ~43 kDa. The samples were processed as above. Experiment number 2 (b015p027) cut out bands at ~100 kDa and 25 kDa but did not protect lysine residues with propionic anhydride although cysteine residues were reduced with DTT and capped with iodoacetamide prior to in-gel trypsin digestion as described.  Crosslinking-MS experiments: Raw files from experiments on the Orbitrap Velos instrument were converted to mgf files using MSConvert on proteowizard and crosslinked peptides were identified using Stavrox (Götze et al., 2012). Light/heavy-labelled BS3 was used as a crosslinker. A FDR of < 5% was used to filter out low-confidence crosslinks and subsequent higher-confidence crosslinks were visualised using xVis (Grimm et al., 2015).  LC-MS/MS Experiments 1 (b015p026) and 3 (b015p056): Data was processed using MaxQuant software platform (v1.5.8.3) with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against the Swissprot Mus musculus database. A reverse decoy database was used at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectrum matches and protein identification. Search parameters included: two missed cleavages, a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modification of methionine oxidation, GlyGly, LRGG and propionylation of lysine. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. ‘Match between runs’ function was used with match and alignment time limits of 1 and 20 min, respectively. Protein and peptide identification and relative quantification outputs from MaxQuant were further processed in Microsoft Excel, with hits to the ‘reverse database’, ‘potential contaminants’ (peptide list only) and ‘Only identified by site’ fields removed.  LC-MS/MS Experiment 2 (b015p047):  Data was processed using MaxQuant software platform (v1.5.8.3) with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against the Swissprot Mus musculus database. A reverse decoy database was used at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectrum matches and protein identification. Search parameters included: two missed cleavages, a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (experiment 3) and variable modification of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, GlyGly and LRGG. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. ‘Match between runs’ function was used with match and alignment time limits of 1 and 20 min, respectively. Protein and peptide identification and relative quantification outputs from MaxQuant were further processed in Microsoft Excel, with hits to the ‘reverse database’, ‘potential contaminants’ (peptide list only) and ‘Only identified by site’ fields removed.  References: Götze, M., Pettelkau, J., Schaks, S., Bosse, K., Ihling, C.H., Krauth, F., Fritzsche, R., Kühn, U., Sinz, A., 2012. StavroX--a software for analyzing crosslinked products in protein interaction studies. Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry 23, 76–87.   Grimm, M., Zimniak, T., Kahraman, A., Herzog, F., 2015. xVis: a web server for the schematic visualization and interpretation of crosslink-derived spatial restraints. Nucleic acids research.

### Publication Abstract
The RING E3 ubiquitin ligase UHRF1 controls DNA methylation through its ability to target the maintenance DNA methyltransferase DNMT1 to newly replicated chromatin. DNMT1 recruitment relies on ubiquitylation of histone H3 by UHRF1; however, how UHRF1 deposits ubiquitin onto the histone is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that the ubiquitin-like domain (UBL) of UHRF1 is essential for RING-mediated H3 ubiquitylation. Using chemical crosslinking and mass spectrometry, biochemical assays, and recombinant chromatin substrates, we show that the UBL participates in structural rearrangements of UHRF1 upon binding to chromatin and the E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzyme UbcH5a/UBE2D1. Similar to ubiquitin, the UBL exerts its effects through a hydrophobic patch that contacts a regulatory surface on the "backside" of the E2 to stabilize the E2-E3-chromatin complex. Our analysis of the enzymatic mechanism of UHRF1 uncovers an unexpected function of the UBL domain and defines a new role for this domain in DNMT1-dependent inheritance of DNA methylation.

### Keywords
Dna methylation, Chromatin, Uhrf1, Ubiquitylation, Ubiquitin-like fold, Histone modification

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Zentrum München  Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH)  Ingolstädter Landstr. 1  D-85764 Neuherberg Germany
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Holger Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Till Bartke
Helmholtz Zentrum München  Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH)  Ingolstädter Landstr. 1  D-85764 Neuherberg Germany


