### Accession
PXD010356

### Title
Search for synaptic biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease

### Description
s synapse degeneration is an early event in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathophysiology, a biofluid marker of synapse loss in living patients could be a surrogate marker of disease prognosis and therefore would be an excellent addition to the AD biomarker arsenal. With direct access to the brain interstitial fluid, the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a potential source of synapse-derived proteins that could be potential biomarkers of underlying synapse degeneration. The aim of this study was to identify, verify and evaluate a set of synaptic proteins as surrogate CSF markers of underlying synapse loss in AD patients. In the Discovery Stage, we combined high-throughput shotgun proteomics of the CSF with an exhaustive search of the literature and public databases for proteomic studies of the CSF and synapse. A thorough characterization of the synaptic component of the CSF identified 210 synaptic proteins that are detectable in human CSF. We selected an initial panel of 22 candidate biomarkers for evaluation.  In the Verification Stage, 12 proteins were discarded due to poor detection by targeted mass spectrometry (Selected Reaction Monitoring, SRM). We confirmed the expression of the remaining 10 proteins either directly at (Calsynytenin-1, GluR2, GluR4, Neurexins 2A and 3A, Neuroligin-2, Syntaxin-1B, Thy-1 and Vamp-2), or surrounding (Tenascin-R), the human synapse using Array Tomography microscopy and biochemical fractionation methods. We quantified the synaptic panel by SRM in CSF samples from 2 independent clinical cohorts of cognitively normal controls and all clinical stages of AD (n=140). A set of the panel proteins demonstrated a non-linear profile distinct to that of existing biomarkers whereby the CSF levels were decreased at the earliest preclinical stage of AD, reflecting reduced synaptic density in these asymptomatic individuals and elevated at later symptomatic stages when neurodegeneration is widespread. In conclusion, we have identified a set of novel synapse-specific proteins that could have clinical value for assessing disease progression in individuals at-risk for AD and potentially in other neurological disorders characterized by early synapse loss.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples were digested and fractionated using SCX. Peptide mixtures were analyzed in an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a nano-LC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) equipped with a reversed-phase chromatography 2-cm C18 pre-column (Acclaim PepMap-100, Thermo; 100 µm i.d., 5 µm), and a reversed-phase chromatography 25cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles Different gradients lengths were used. Data was acquired using a top20 DDA method with CID fragmantation.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the Mascot search engine (v2.5.1, Matrix Science) was used for peptide identification. Data were searched against the Swiss Prot Human protein database plus the most common contaminants. A precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to three missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Oxidation of Methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation was defined as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of Cysteines was set as fixed modification. The identified peptides were filtered 5%FDR.

### Publication Abstract
A biomarker of synapse loss, an early event in Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathophysiology that precedes neuronal death and symptom onset, would be a much-needed prognostic biomarker. With direct access to the brain interstitial fluid, the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a potential source of synapse-derived proteins. In this study, we aimed to identify and validate novel CSF biomarkers of synapse loss in AD. Discovery: Combining shotgun proteomics of the CSF with an exhaustive search of the literature and public databases, we identified 251 synaptic proteins, from which we selected 22 for further study. Verification: Twelve proteins were discarded because of poor detection by Selected Reaction Monitoring (SRM). We confirmed the specific expression of 9 of the remaining proteins (Calsynytenin-1, GluR2, GluR4, Neurexin-2A, Neurexin-3A, Neuroligin-2, Syntaxin-1B, Thy-1, Vamp-2) at the human synapse using Array Tomography microscopy and biochemical fractionation methods. Exploration: Using SRM, we monitored these 9 synaptic proteins (20 peptides) in a cohort of CSF from cognitively normal controls and subjects in the pre-clinical and clinical AD stages (<i>n</i> = 80). Compared with controls, peptides from 8 proteins were elevated 1.3 to 1.6-fold (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.04) in prodromal AD patients. Validation: Elevated levels of a GluR4 peptide at the prodromal stage were replicated (1.3-fold, <i>p</i> = 0.04) in an independent cohort (<i>n</i> = 60). Moreover, 7 proteins were reduced at preclinical stage 1 (0.6 to 0.8-fold, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.04), a finding that was replicated (0.7 to 0.8-fold, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) for 6 proteins in a third cohort (<i>n</i> = 38). In a cross-cohort meta-analysis, 6 synaptic proteins (Calsyntenin-1, GluR4, Neurexin-2A, Neurexin-3A, Syntaxin-1B and Thy-1) were reduced 0.8-fold (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) in preclinical AD, changes that precede clinical symptoms and CSF markers of neurodegeneration. Therefore, these proteins could have clinical value for assessing disease progression, especially in preclinical stages of AD.

### Keywords
Targeted, Biomarker, Alzheimer, Srm

### Affiliations
University Pompeu Fabra
UPF/CRG Proteomics Unit

### Submitter
Cristina Chiva

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
UPF/CRG Proteomics Unit


