### Accession
PXD000422

### Title
Linkage of oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunctions to spontaneous culture degeneration in Aspergillus nidulans

### Description
Filamentous fungi including mushrooms frequently and spontaneously degenerate during subsequent culture maintenance on artificial media, which shows the loss or reduction abilities of asexual sporulation, sexuality, fruiting and production of secondary metabolites, thus leading to economic losses during mass production. To better understand the underlying mechanisms of fungal degeneration, the model fungus Aspergillus nidulans was employed in this study for comprehensive analyses. First, linkage of oxidative stress to culture degeneration was evident in A. nidulans. Taken together with the verifications of cell biology and biochemical data, a comparative mitochondrial proteome analysis revealed that, unlike the healthy wild type, a spontaneous fluffy sector culture of A. nidulans demonstrated the characteristics of mitochondrial dysfunctions. Relative to the wild type, the features of cytochrome c release, calcium overload and up-regulation of apoptosis inducing factors evident in sector mitochondria suggested a linkage of fungal degeneration to cell apoptosis. However, the sector culture could still be maintained for generations without the signs of growth arrest. Up-regulation of the heat shock protein chaperones, anti-apoptotic factors and DNA repair proteins in the sector could account for the compromise in cell death. The results of this study not only shed new lights on the mechanisms of spontaneous degeneration of fungal cultures but will also provide alternative biomarkers to monitor fungal culture degeneration.        Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of the WT and Sec mt proteins was performed as described previously. Briefly, purified mitochondrial proteins (100 ug) were diluted in the lysis buffer to a concentration of 5 g/ul and carboxyamidomethylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min at room temperature in the dark. The proteins were digested with an endoprotease Lys-C (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) at a final substrate/enzyme ratio of 100:1 (w/w) at 37 C for 3 h. The Lys-C digests were further treated with modified sequencing grade trypsin (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) at a final substrate/enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w/w) at 37 C for 20 h. After digestion, the peptide mixture was passed through an ultra-filter unit (Millipore, Billerica, MA) with a molecular weight cut-off of 10 kDa and acidified by formic acid (0.1% final concentration) for mass spectrum analysis. A linear ion trap-orbitrap liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry system (LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Josse, CA) equipped with a nanospray ion source was used for full MS scan analysis followed by five MS/MS scans in the LTQ on the five most intense ions from the MS spectrum. Three parallel runs were performed consecutively for each sample. The software DeCyder MS (ver 2.0) (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA) was used to generate the peak lists from all the runs and the data were then automatically searched using the SEQUEST (ver. 2.7) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Josse, CA) against the A. nidulans genome archive (ver. S03-M05-R01, containing 10,644 protein entries) at AspGD database (www.aspgd.org) with the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance set to 10 ppm; fragment tolerance set to 0.8 Da, and two missed trypsin cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification, whereas N-acetyl protein and oxidation of methionine were searched as variable modifications. For protein identification, all peptide matches were filtered by a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) index less than 0.01, delta Cn larger than 0.1 and Xcorr scores of greater than 1.7, 2.0 and 3.0 for +1, +2, and +3 charged ions, respectively. The peptides were discarded for further analysis if mapped to more than two different proteins. A protein was considered identifiable with at least one unique peptide detected for more than twice in the three replicates of each sample. The MS data have been deposited in the PRIDE proteomics identification database under accession numbers ? List of the identified peptides and matched proteins is provided in Supplemental Table 1. Quantification of proteins was performed by estimating the normalized spectral index (SIN) for each protein, which combines the features of peptide count, spectral count, fragment-ion intensity and protein length as described by Griffin et al.. Reliability of technical repeats was analyzed by calculating the multivariate Pearson correlation coefficients using the software SigmaPlot (ver. 8.0). FDR estimation of differentially expressed proteins was conducted using a mixture model-based method. Heat mapping analysis was conducted using the program Matlab (R2009a). The significance of differentially expressed proteins between the samples was tested with the cutoff values of P less than or equal to 0.05 and FDR less than or equal to 0.05.

### Sample Protocol
The WT strain of A. nidulans FGSC A4 was maintained on potato dextrose agar (PDA, BD Difco, Sparks, MD) for 2 weeks at 28 °C (Fig. 1A). A spontaneous sector (Sec, Fig. 1B) of A4 strain that showed a fluffy mycelium-type growth without sporulation was randomly selected and transferred to a fresh PDA plate (Fig. 1D). For oxidative stress challenge, H2O2 was supplied in the PDA plates to a final concentration of 20 mm (15). The A. nidulans strain TN02A7 (pyrG89; pyroA4; nkuA::argB2; riboB2; veA1) was used for fungal transformation and protein localization analysis (23). To determine the growth of Sec the antioxidant agent N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC) was added to PDA plates to a final concentration of 5 mm (24). Sabouraud dextrose broth (SDB, BD Difco, Sparks, MD) was used to grow the fungi in liquid medium when required. The following media were used for fungal transformations: YAG (2% glucose, 0.5% yeast extract, trace elements of solution), YUU (YAG supplemented with 5 mm uridine and 10 mm uracil), YAGK (YAG with 0.6 m KCl) and YUUK (YUU with 0.6 m KCl). Trace elements were prepared by adding the compounds of ZnSO4●7H2O, 2.2 g; H3BO3, 1.1 g; MnCl2●4H2O, 0.5 g; FeSO4●7H2O, 0.5 g; CoCl2●5H2O, 0.16 g; CuSO4●5H2O, 0.16 g; (NH4)6Mo7O24●4H2O, 0.11 g; Na4EDTA, 5.0 g to 80 ml of sterile water. The pH was adjusted to 6.5–6.8 with KOH pellets and the volume of solution was finally adjusted to 100 ml (25). To prepare solid media, agar was added (2%) individually in the liquid media. Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of the WT and Sec mt proteins was performed as described previously (28). Briefly, purified mitochondrial proteins (100 μg) were diluted in the lysis buffer to a concentration of 5 g/μl and carboxyamidomethylated in 50 mm iodoacetamide for 40 min at room temperature in the dark. The proteins were digested with an endoprotease Lys-C (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) at a final substrate/enzyme ratio of 100:1 (w/w) at 37 °C for 3 h. The Lys-C digests were further treated with modified sequencing grade trypsin (Roche Applied Science) at a final substrate/enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w/w) at 37 °C for 20 h. After digestion, the peptide mixture was passed through an ultrafilter unit (Millipore, Billerica, MA) with a molecular weight cut-off of 10 kDa and acidified by formic acid (0.1% final concentration) for mass spectrum analysis.

### Data Protocol
A linear ion trap-orbitrap liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry system (LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Josse, CA) equipped with a nanospray ion source was used for full MS scan analysis followed by five MS/MS scans in the LTQ on the five most intense ions from the MS spectrum. Three parallel runs were performed consecutively for each sample. The software DeCyder MS (ver 2.0) (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA) was used to generate the peak lists from all the runs and the data were then automatically searched using the SEQUEST (ver. 2.7) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Josse, CA) against the A. nidulans genome archive (ver. S03-M05-R01, containing 10,644 protein entries) at AspGD database (www.aspgd.org) with the following parameters (28): peptide mass tolerance set to 10 ppm; fragment tolerance set to 0.8 Da, and two missed trypsin cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification, whereas N-acetyl protein and oxidation of methionine were searched as variable modifications. For protein identification, all peptide matches were filtered by a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) index less than 0.01, ΔCn larger than 0.1 and Xcorr scores of greater than 1.7, 2.0, and 3.0 for +1, +2, and +3 charged ions, respectively. The peptides were discarded for further analysis if mapped to more than two different proteins. A protein was considered identifiable with at least one unique peptide detected for more than twice in the three replicates of each sample (29). Full MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (30) with the data set identifier PXD000422 (PRIDE accessions: 32763–32768). Quantification of proteins was performed by estimating the normalized spectral index (SIN) for each protein, which combines the features of peptide count, spectral count, fragment-ion intensity and protein length as described by Griffin et al. (31). Reliability of technical repeats was analyzed by calculating the multivariate Pearson correlation coefficients using the software SigmaPlot (ver. 8.0). FDR estimation of differentially expressed proteins was conducted using a mixture model-based method (32). Heat mapping analysis was conducted using the program Matlab (R2009a). The significance of differentially expressed proteins between the samples was tested with the cutoff values of p ≤ 0.05 and FDR ≤ 0.05 (33).

### Publication Abstract
Filamentous fungi including mushrooms frequently and spontaneously degenerate during subsequent culture maintenance on artificial media, which shows the loss or reduction abilities of asexual sporulation, sexuality, fruiting, and production of secondary metabolites, thus leading to economic losses during mass production. To better understand the underlying mechanisms of fungal degeneration, the model fungus Aspergillus nidulans was employed in this study for comprehensive analyses. First, linkage of oxidative stress to culture degeneration was evident in A. nidulans. Taken together with the verifications of cell biology and biochemical data, a comparative mitochondrial proteome analysis revealed that, unlike the healthy wild type, a spontaneous fluffy sector culture of A. nidulans demonstrated the characteristics of mitochondrial dysfunctions. Relative to the wild type, the features of cytochrome c release, calcium overload and up-regulation of apoptosis inducing factors evident in sector mitochondria suggested a linkage of fungal degeneration to cell apoptosis. However, the sector culture could still be maintained for generations without the signs of growth arrest. Up-regulation of the heat shock protein chaperones, anti-apoptotic factors and DNA repair proteins in the sector could account for the compromise in cell death. The results of this study not only shed new lights on the mechanisms of spontaneous degeneration of fungal cultures but will also provide alternative biomarkers to monitor fungal culture degeneration.

### Keywords
Aspergillus nidulans, Mitochondrial proteomics, Culture degeneration

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, CAS
Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental and Evolutionary Biology, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032, China

### Submitter
Chengshu Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Chengshu Wang
Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental and Evolutionary Biology, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032, China


