### Accession
PXD018999

### Title
A dichotomous response to chronic fetal hypoxia preprograms aging already during kidney development

### Description
Hypoxia-induced intrauterine growth restriction increases the risk for chronic diseases in adults, affecting more than 140 million high altitude residents worldwide. Still, not much is known about the fetal mechanisms that prone these individuals to disease. Using bottom-up proteomics and the kidney as a readout, we delineated a dichotomous response to chronic hypoxic stress, comprising mechanisms that promote survival, but also induce premature senescence. Combined outcome is the manifestation of a predetermined aging phenotype already during fetal development. This aging phenotype is associated with a characteristic biomarker profile in tissue and blood serum samples, exploitable for targeting and monitoring disease.

### Sample Protocol
Animals. B C57BL/6N mice were housed in IVC cages with free access to chow and water and a 12h day/night cycle. All animal experiments were conducted according to the Swiss law for the welfare of animals and were approved by the local authorities (Canton of Bern BE96/11, BE105/14 and BE105/17). For timed mating, females in breeding were checked for vaginal plugs every morning, and if present the time point was set to gestational day (E) 0.5. For induction of hypoxia, mice at gestational day E11.5 were transferred into a hypoxic glove box (Coy Laboratory Products, Grass Lake, USA) and the oxygen content was gradually lowered to 10% within 3-4 hours. An electric fan inside the chamber maintained adequate air circulation. The CO2 level was kept low by chelating excess CO2 in soda lime (Sigma, 72073) filled cartridges connected to the air circulation system. Excess humidity was absorbed by silica gel orange granulate (Sigma, 1.01969), changed every day. Mice were euthanized at E18.5 and fetuses and placentas were collected, weighed and prepared for further analysis. Fetal kidneys were dissected in PBS using a Leica M80 stereoscope. Sample Preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis. Isolated male fetal kidneys (n=3 for each group) were homogenized in sample buffer (7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)) using an ultrasonic stick. Protein concentrations were determined by means of a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad-Laboratories, Germany). An in-gel digestion protocol was applied. In brief, 80µg of each sample was loaded on SDS-PAGE, which allowed us to pre-fractionate the sample in order to reduce the complexity thereof. After fixation with 50% methanol/10% acetic acid, the gels were washed and sensitized with 0.02% Na2S2O3. Gels were then stained with 0.1% AgNO3 for 10min, rinsed and developed with 3% Na2CO3/0.05% formaldehyde. Each protein band was then cut into 4 slices and destained. Upon reduction with DTT and alkylation with iodacetamide (IAA), the proteins were digested enzymatically using Trypsin/Lys-C (MS grade; Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA). Following digestion, the peptides were eluted, dried and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide samples were reconstituted in 5µl 30% formic acid (FA) containing 10fmol each of 4 synthetic standard peptides and diluted with 40µl mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). Synthetic peptides [Glu1-Fribrinopeptide B – EGVNDNEEGFFSAR; M28 – TTPAVLDSDGSYFLYSK; HK0 – VLETKSLYVR; HK1 - VLETK(ε-AC)SLYVR] were spiked in each sample as internal quality control for monitoring LC-MS-system stability. 10µl of this solution were then injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). As pre-concentration step, peptides were loaded on a 2cm x75µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) at a flow rate of 10µl/min using mobile phase A. Elution of peptides from the pre-column to a 50cm x75µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and subsequent separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300nl/min using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 19.9% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 235min. Mass spectrometric detection was accomplished, performing MS scans in the range from m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200). MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions were achieved through HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200). All samples were analyzed in duplicates.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification searching against “mus musculus” in the SwissProt Database (version 04/2017) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tissue proteomics, Aging, Hypoxia, Mass spectrometry, High performance liquid chromatography, Kidney development

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Vienna
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Vienna


