### Accession
PXD021603

### Title
Cellular States Dictate Adaptive Signaling Responses to KRASG12C Inhibition: Protein Expression

### Description
Covalent inhibitors of KRASG12C (KRASi) hold considerable progress for tumors driven by this oncogene yet early studies suggest rapid mechanisms of adaptive resistance that appear cell type dependent. To address these challenges, we performed mass spsectrometry baesd phosphoproteomics analysis in KRASG12C cell lines after short term treatment with ARS-1620 and compared phosphoproteomes of KRASG12C cells to understand signaling diversity. Our analysis suggests individual KRASG12C cells responds uniquely to perturbation of KRASG12C.  Cell line models can be categorized in epithelial or mesenchymal subtypes and a similar pattern was observed in KRASG12C human lung cancer tumor tissues. ERBB2/3 signaling compensate for repressed ERK signaling following ARS-1620 treatment in epithelial cell type, and this subtype was also more responsive to inhibition of SHP2, IGFR, and SOS1. Conversely, FGFR signaling drives resistance to KRASi in mesenchymal cells in part via mTOR signaling.  These studies suggest transcriptional subtypes of KRASG12C dictate responsiveness to specific combinations.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics was carried out according to Cell Signaling Technology protocol (#8803). Briefly the cells were lysed in denaturing buffer, followed by reduction/alkylation, trypsin digestion and peptide desalting. For phosphotyrosine enrichment, anti-pY-1000 antibodies were used, followed by TMT labeling and IMAC enrichment. For global phosphorylation enrichment, the peptides were labeled with TMT first and fractionated with bRPLC, followed by IMAC enrichment. A nanoflow ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography interfaced with an electrospray quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (RSLCnano and Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo, San Jose, CA) was used for LC-MS/MS peptide sequencing and TMT quantification.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10) was used for peptide identification and reporter ion quantification. For this upload, database searches were performed in Mascot using tryptic cleavage, mass tolerance values appropriate to the Q Exactive Platform, and searching for phosphorylation of S/T/Y in human entries in the UniProt database. Data were normalized and analyzed for differential expression between treatment and control time points.  Experimentally consistent literature networks were generated for lists of differentially expressed proteins using the MetaCore (Clarivate Analytics) pathway analysis website. See online supplement for full methods.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Signal transduction, Phosphoproteomics, Targeted therapy, Lung cancer, Kras, Drug resistance, Mass spectrometry, Receptor tyrosine kinases (rtk)

### Affiliations
Thoracic Oncology
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Haura, MD
Thoracic Oncology


