### Accession
PXD012565

### Title
INKA, an integrative analysis pipeline for inference of hyperactive phosphokinases in mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics data: CRC Organoids

### Description
CRC Organoid and corresponding PDX data are part of a larger project that includes proteomeXchange accessions PXD006616, PXD008032, and PXD009995. We present a computational pipeline called Integrative Inferred Kinase Activity (INKA) scoring that integrates the observed abundance of phosphopeptides derived from (i) kinases as a whole, (ii) their kinase activation loop segments, (iii) proteins deduced to be kinase substrates based on prior experimental knowledge of kinase-substrate relationships, and/or (iv) kinase substrates predicted by the sequence motif- and network-based NetworKIN algorithm.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed once in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) prior to lysis in lysisbuffer (9M urea buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and phosphatase inhibitors). Cells were scraped and sonicated. Tissues were cut on a cryomicrotome in 20 micron sections and lysed in  lysisbuffer and sonicated. Subsequent centrifugation of the lysate was performed for 15 min at maximum speed. The cleared lysate was aliquotted and stored at -80 °C until further use. Lysates were reduced in 4 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 20 min at 60°C, cooled to room temperature and subsequently alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. After dilution to 2M urea using 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.0, the lysate was digested with 20 µg Sequencing Grade Modified trypsin/mg protein by overnight incubation at 22°C. Digestion was then halted by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were then incubated for 15 min on ice, centrifuged for 5 min at 1800 x g and transferred to a new tube. Tryptic digests were desalted using 10 ml Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) placed on a vacuum system. Bound peptides were washed using 0.1% TFA before elution to glass vials in 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Eluates were lyophilized for 48 hours and stored at -80 ºC until further use.  Phosphopeptide enrichment. Enrichment for tyrosine phosphorylated phosphopeptides was performed using the anti-phosphotyrosine antibody P-Tyr-1000 coupled to agarose beads (PTMScan, Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, 1.6 mg lyophilized phosphopeptides were dissolved in IAP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 2 µl P-Tyr-1000 beads per mg protein at 4 ºC for 2 hours. After washing in cold IAP buffer and MQ, peptides were eluted from the beads in two steps in 0.15% TFA, desalted in 20 ul StageTips using 0.1% TFA  and eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA into glass-lined autosampler vials. Eluates were dried in a speedvac and redissolved in 20µl loading solvent (4% acetonitrile in 0.5% TFA)  and stored at 4˚ C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day. Global phosphopeptide enrichement was performed from 500 µg peptides using titaniumdioxide beads from GL sciences (10 micron) using 300 mM Lactic acid and 80% acetonitrile. Phosphopeptides were eluted by 0.5% and 5% piperidine and were desalted on a STAGE tip as described above.   LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 2 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 15 for peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide and Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against Swissprot human proteome (canonical and isoforms 2018_01,  42122 entries) using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6 (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked.   Label-free phosphopeptide quantification Phosphopeptides were quantified by counting MS/MS spectra (spectral counts) or by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For pTyr IP data for each sample the phosphopeptides/and site intensities were normalized on the corresponding lysate summed intensity. For TiOx data the phosphopeptide and site  intensities were normalysed on the median intensity of all identified peptides (from the MaxQuant Evidence table) in the sample prior to statistical analysis. The counts and intensities in the supplementary tables are non-normalised.

### Publication Abstract
Identifying hyperactive kinases in cancer is crucial for individualized treatment with specific inhibitors. Kinase activity can be discerned from global protein phosphorylation profiles obtained with mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics. A major challenge is to relate such profiles to specific hyperactive kinases fueling growth/progression of <i>individual</i> tumors. Hitherto, the focus has been on phosphorylation of either kinases or their substrates. Here, we combined label-free kinase-centric and substrate-centric information in an Integrative Inferred Kinase Activity (INKA) analysis. This multipronged, stringent analysis enables ranking of kinase activity and visualization of kinase-substrate networks in a single biological sample. To demonstrate utility, we analyzed (i) cancer cell lines with known oncogenes, (ii) cell lines in a differential setting (wild-type versus mutant, +/- drug), (iii) pre- and on-treatment tumor needle biopsies, (iv) cancer cell panel with available drug sensitivity data, and (v) patient-derived tumor xenografts with INKA-guided drug selection and testing. These analyses show superior performance of INKA over its components and substrate-based single-sample tool KARP, and underscore target potential of high-ranking kinases, encouraging further exploration of INKA's functional and clinical value.

### Keywords
Human, Organoids, Phosphoproteomics, Crc, Pdx, Phosphokinase ranking, Label-free, Single-shot

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


