### Accession
PXD009916

### Title
A549 CD38 secretomic analysis -  Decreased NAD Activates STAT3 and Integrin Pathways to Drive Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition

### Description
Using A549 CD38 overexpression cells to do secretomic analysis

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in medium supplemented with 10% FBS until they reached 70% confluency. Cells were washed with PBS three times, and then incubated in serum and phenol red free medium at 37°C for 12 h. Medium was collected and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min to remove large debris. Supernatants were collected and four-volumes of ice-cold acetone added, followed by overnight precipitation at -20C. The supernatant was discarded after 10,000 rpm centrifugation at 4C for 10 min, and pellets dissolved in 8 M urea. Supernatants were collected after centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 20 min at 4C. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Solarbio, Beijing, China). Equal protein amounts were used for the following experiment. In-solution digestion was performed. Protein disulfides were reduced by dithiothreitol at 5 mM for 60 min at room temperature, and free cysteine residues alkylated with iodoacetamide at 12 mM for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. Protein samples were digested with trypsin for 14 h at 37C. Peptides were desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, labeled using TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and fractioned by HPLC separation. Collected eluents were combined into 12 fractions and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The search criteria were: full tryptic specificity was required; two missed cleavage sites were allowed; oxidation of methionine, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation of cysteine, TMT6plex at lysine, and TMT6plex at protein N-terminus were set as the fixed modifications; and precursor ion mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm for all MS and 20 mmu for all MS2 spectra. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using the percolator function provided by Proteome Discoverer, with a cutoff score of 1% based on decoy database searching.

### Publication Abstract
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) plays an essential role in all aspects of human life. NAD levels decrease as humans age, and supplementation with NAD precursors plays a protective role against aging and associated disease. Less is known about the effects of decreased NAD on cellular processes, which is the basis for understanding the relationship between cellular NAD levels and aging-associated disease. In the present study, cellular NAD levels were decreased by overexpression of CD38, a NAD hydrolase, or by treating cells with FK866, an inhibitor of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT). Quantitative proteomics revealed that declining NAD levels downregulated proteins associated with primary metabolism and suppressed cell growth in culture and nude mice. Decreased glutathione synthesis caused a 4-fold increase in cellular reactive oxygen species levels, and more importantly upregulated proteins related to movement and adhesion. In turn, this significantly changed cell morphology and caused cells to undergo epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Secretomic analysis also showed that decreased NAD triggered interleukin-6 and transforming growth factor beta (TGF&#x3b2;) secretion, which activated integrin-&#x3b2;-catenin, TGF&#x3b2;-MAPK, and inflammation signaling pathways to sustain the signaling required for EMT. We further revealed that decreased NAD inactivated sirtuin 1, resulting in increased signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) acetylation and phosphorylation, and STAT3 activation. Repletion of nicotinamide or nicotinic acid inactivated STAT3 and reversed EMT, as did STAT3 inhibition. Taken together, these results indicate that decreased NAD activates multiple signaling pathways to promote EMT and suggests that age-dependent decreases in NAD may contribute to tumor progression. Consequently, repletion of NAD precursors has potential benefits for inhibiting cancer progression.

### Keywords
Secretomic, A549 cd38

### Affiliations
tsinghua university

### Submitter
weixuan wang

### Lab Head
Dr haiteng, deng
tsinghua university


