### Accession
PXD022515

### Title
Hexameric VCP/p97 reprograms transcription  by organizing enhancers with the  ASPSCR1-TFE3 fusion oncoprotein

### Description
Aberrant transcription in alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) is orchestrated by the fusion oncoprotein, ASPSCR1-TFE3, resulting from a gene fusion created by a t(X;17) chromosomal translocation. Proteomic analysis of co-immunoprecipitated ASPSCR1-TFE3 complexes revealed strong enrichment of VCP/p97, an AAA+ ATPase with known segregase function. VCP and ASPSCR1-TFE3 co-distributed across chromatin and were associated with active enhancers, indicated by flanking peaks of H3K27ac that assemble into higher order chromatin structures by HiChIP. Positive and negative genetic experiments with ASPSCR1-TFE3 and VCP demonstrated that they function co-dependently for cancer cell proliferation, colony formation, enhancer activation, chromatin conformation, and transcription. The VCP associating with ASPSCR1-TFE3 was found by native gel and electron microscopy to be assembled into homo-hexamers. Disruption of VCP hexamer assembly or enzymatic function inhibited the transcriptional impact of ASPSCR1-TFE3. Thus, a segregase was found to bind chromatin and assemble into 3-dimensional structures as a co-factor of transcriptional regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed as decribed in: Hughes CS, McConechy MK, Cochrane DR, Nazeran T, Karnezis AN, Huntsman DG, et al. Quantitative profiling of single formalin fixed tumour sections: proteomics for translational research. Sci Rep 2016;6:34949.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer software (v2.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific), searching against the human (2020/02/08, Swiss-Prot) or mouse (2020/01/20, Swiss-Prot) uniprot reference proteomes plus a list of common contaminants. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.8Da. Dynamic modifications included Oxidation (+15.995 Da, M), Acetylation (+42.011 Da, N-Term), and static modification included Carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da, C) and TMT (+229.163 Da, K, N-Term). Peptide identification FDR was calculated using Percolator by searching the results against a decoy sequence set, only peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs)  with FDR< 1% were retained in the analysis. All PSM reporter ion values were corrected for isotopic impurities provided by the manufacturer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Asps, Tmt

### Affiliations
gsc
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada

### Submitter
Gian Luca Negri

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada


