### Accession
PXD018151

### Title
Deciphering and predicting CD4+ T cell immunodominance of Influenza virus hemagglutinin

### Description
The importance of CD4+ T helper (Th) cells is well appreciated in view of their essential role in the elicitation of antibody and cytotoxic T cell responses. However, the mechanisms that determine the selection of immunodominant epitopes within complex protein antigens remain elusive. Here, we used ex vivo stimulation of memory T cells and screening of naïve and memory T cell libraries, combined with T cell cloning and TCR sequencing, to dissect the human naïve and memory CD4+ T cell repertoire against the influenza pandemic H1 hemagglutinin (H1-HA). We found that naïve CD4+ T cells have a broad repertoire, being able to recognize naturally processed as well as cryptic peptides spanning the whole H1-HA sequence. In contrast, memory Th cells were primarily directed against just a few immunodominant peptides that were readily detected by mass spectrometry-based MHC-II peptidomics and predicted by structural accessibility analysis. Collectively, these findings reveal the presence of a broad repertoire of naïve T cells specific for cryptic H1-HA peptides, and demonstrate that antigen processing represents a major constraint determining immunodominance.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of MHC-II presented peptides. MoDCs generated from donor HD1 were pulsed 2 hrs with 10 µg/ml recombinant H1-HA at a cellular density of 3×106 cells/ml, and matured overnight with 100 ng/ml LPS (Enzo Life Sciences) at a cellular density of 1×106 cells/ml. HA-specific EBV-B cell clones isolated from IgG+ memory B cells of each of the four donors were pulsed overnight with 200 ng/ml recombinant H1-HA at a cellular density of 5×106 cells/ml. MHC-II complexes were purified from about 3×107 HA-pulsed moDCs or 109 HA-pulsed EBV-B cells with a protocol adapted from Bassani-Sternberg M. et al (Bassani-Sternberg et al., 2015). Briefly, the B cells were lysed with 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1% octyl-β-D glucopyranoside (Sigma), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, and Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) in PBS at 4°C for 1 h. The lysates were cleared by 20 min centrifugation at 18,000 g at 4°C, and MHC-II complexes were purified by immunoaffinity chromatography with the anti-HLA-DR/DP/DQ HB-145 monoclonal antibody produced in house from hybridoma cell line IVA12 (ATCC, cat. no. HB-145) and covalently bound to Protein-A Sepharose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cleared lysates were loaded 3 times into the affinity columns at 4°C, and subsequently washed at 4°C with 10 column volumes of 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris•HCl, pH 8 (buffer A); 10 column volumes of 400 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris•HCl, pH 8; 10 column volumes of buffer A; and finally 10 column volumes of 20 mM Tris•HCl, pH 8. The MHC-II complexes were eluted at room temperature by addition of 500 µl of 0.1 M acetic acid, in total five elutions for each sample. Small aliquots of each eluted fraction were analyzed by 12% SDS-PAGE to evaluate yield and purity of MHC-II complexes. Sep-Pak tC18 (Waters, Milford, MA) cartridges were used for further separation of peptides from MHC-II subunits. The cartridges were prewashed with 80% acetonitrile (AcN) in 0.5% formic acid, followed by 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and subsequently loaded 3 times with each fraction eluted from the immunoaffinity column. After loading, the cartridges were washed with 0.2% TFA, and the peptides were separated from the more hydrophobic MHC-II chains by elution with 30% AcN in 0.2% TFA. The peptides were further purified using a Silica C18 column tip (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA) and eluted again with 30% AcN in 0.2% TFA. Finally, the peptides were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 2% AcN, 0.1% TFA, 0.5% formic acid for MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and data analysis. MHC-II peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system coupled online to a Q Exactive mass HF spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) on in-house packed columns (75 μm inner diameter, 50 cm length, and 1.9 μm C18 particles from Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted with a non-linear 120 min gradient of 5% – 60% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and a column temperature of 50°C. The Q Exactive was operated in a data dependent mode with a survey scan range of 300 – 1650 m/z and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to 10 most abundant isotope patterns with a charge ≥ 1 were isolated with a 1.8 Th wide isolation window and subjected to higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27. Fragmentation spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200. Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 30 s to reduce the number of repeated sequences. Thresholds for the ion injection time and ion target values were set to 80 ms and 3E6 for the survey scans and 120 ms and 1E5 for the MS/MS scans, respectively. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software was used to analyze mass spectrometry raw files. MS/MS spectra were searched against the A/California/07/2009 (H1N1) HA sequence (UniProtKB: A0A075EXW1), the bovine Uniprot FASTA database, the human Uniprot FASTA database, and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications; no fixed modifications were selected; the enzyme specificity was set to “unspecific” with a minimum peptide length of 8 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required for peptides. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed precursor mass deviation of up to 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm; “match between runs” option was disabled.

### Publication Abstract
The importance of CD4+ T helper (Th) cells is well appreciated in view of their essential role in the elicitation of antibody and cytotoxic T cell responses. However, the mechanisms that determine the selection of immunodominant epitopes within complex protein antigens remain elusive. Here, we used ex vivo stimulation of memory T cells and screening of naive and memory T cell libraries, combined with T cell cloning and TCR sequencing, to dissect the human naive and memory CD4+ T cell repertoire against the influenza pandemic H1 hemagglutinin (H1-HA). We found that naive CD4+ T cells have a broad repertoire, being able to recognize naturally processed as well as cryptic peptides spanning the whole H1-HA sequence. In contrast, memory Th cells were primarily directed against just a few immunodominant peptides that were readily detected by mass spectrometry-based MHC-II peptidomics and predicted by structural accessibility analysis. Collectively, these findings reveal the presence of a broad repertoire of naive T cells specific for cryptic H1-HA peptides and demonstrate that antigen processing represents a major constraint determining immunodominance.

### Keywords
Human, Antigen presentation, Ebv-b, Modc, Hemagglutinin, Influenza, Mhc-ii, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana
Institute for Research in Biomedicine Università della Svizzera italiana (USI), Faculty of Biomedical Sciences Via Vincenzo Vela 6 6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland

### Submitter
Antonino Cassotta

### Lab Head
Dr Federica Sallusto
Institute for Research in Biomedicine Università della Svizzera italiana (USI), Faculty of Biomedical Sciences Via Vincenzo Vela 6 6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland


