### Accession
PXD021991

### Title
Global proteomics of Ubqln2-based murine models of ALS

### Description
Familial neurodegenerative diseases commonly involve mutations that result in either aberrant proteins or dysfunctional components of the proteolytic  machinery that acts on aberrant proteins. UBQLN2 is a ubiquitin receptor of the UBL/UBA family that binds the proteasome through its ubiquitin-like (UBL) domain and is thought to deliver ubiquitinated proteins to proteasomes for degradation. UBQLN2 mutations result in familial ALS/FTD in humans through an unknown mechanism. Quantitative multiplexed proteomics was used to provide for the first time an unbiased and global analysis of the role of Ubqln2 in controlling the composition of the proteome. We studied several murine models of Ubqln2-linked ALS and also generated Ubqln2 null mutant mice. We identified impacts of Ubqln2 on diverse physiological pathways, most notably serotonergic signaling. Interestingly, we observed upregulation of proteasome subunits, suggesting a compensatory response to diminished proteasome output. Among the specific proteins whose abundance is linked to UBQLN2 function, the strongest hits were the ubiquitin ligase TRIM32 and two retroelement-derived proteins, PEG10 and CXX1B. Cycloheximide chase studies using induced human neurons and HEK293 cells suggested that PEG10 and TRIM32 are direct clients. Although directing the degradation of multiple proteins via the proteasome, UBQLN2 surprisingly conferred strong protection from degradation on the Gag-like protein CXX1B, which is expressed from the same family of retroelement genes as PEG10. In summary, this study charts the proteomic landscape of ALS-related Ubqln2 mutants and identifies candidate client proteins that are altered in vivo in disease models and whose degradation is promoted by UBQLN2.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for Mass Spectrometry analysis. Tissues were lysed and homogenized in 8 M urea buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES [pH 7.5], 75 mM NaCl, 1x EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche], 1x PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail [Roche]). Lysates were centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 15 min at 4ºC and protein concentration quantified by BCA (Pierce). 100 µg of protein of each sample was collected and brought to 1 µg/µl in 8 M urea buffer. For reduction and alkylation of cysteines, protein extracts were sequentially incubated with 5 mM TCEP at RT for 30 min, 14 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min in the dark, and 10 mM DTT for 15 min at RT. Finally, proteins were methanol-chloroform precipitated and the protein pellet resuspend in 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5). For digestion, LysC (Wako) was added at 1:100 (LysC:protein) ratio, and incubated overnight at RT in an orbital shaker at 1,500 rpm. The day after, trypsin (sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega) was added at 1:75 (trypsin:protein) ratio and incubated for 5 h at 37ºC with shaking at 1,500 rpm. After digestion, samples were clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 x g for 10 min and peptide concentration quantified using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher). For Tandem-Mass-Tag (TMT) labeling we used TMT10-plex kits (Thermo Fisher). In brief, 25 µg of peptides were brought to 1 µg/µl with 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5), acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 30% and then 50 µg of each TMT reagent was added (information on all TMT sample labels is included in Supplemental Table 2), followed by incubation of the mixture for 1 hr at RT. Finally, the reaction was stopped by the addition of 0.3% hydroxylamine (Sigma) for 15 min at RT.  To check mixing ratios and labeling efficiency, samples (1 µg each) were pooled, desalted, and analyzed by mass spectrometry in a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher). Normalization factors calculated from this “label check” (Supplemental Table 5) were used to mix the rest of the samples before desalting with tC18 50 mg SepPak solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters) and drying using a SpeedVac. Next, dried peptides were resuspended in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate 5% ACN (pH 8.0) and fractionated with basic-pH reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (using a 3.5μm Zorbax 300 Extended-C18 column [Agilent]). Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate, then combined into 24 samples. 12 of these were desalted following the C18 Stop and Go Extraction Tip (STAGE-Tip) and dried down in a SpeedVac. Finally, peptides were resuspended in 1% formic acid, 3% ACN and analyzed by LC-MS3.   Liquid chromatography-MS3 (LC-MS3) All samples were analyzed with an LC-MS3 data collection strategy (PMID: 24927332) on Orbitrap Fusion or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a Proxeon Easy nLC 1000 for online sample handling and peptide separations. Samples resuspended in 1% formic acid, 3% ACN were loaded onto a 100-µm inner diameter fused-silica microcapillary with a needle tip pulled to an internal diameter less than 5 µm. The column was packed in-house to a length of 35 cm with a C18 reverse phase resin (Accucore 150 2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated using a 150-min or 135-min linear gradient from 3% to 25% buffer B (90% ACN + 0.125% formic acid) equilibrated with buffer A (3% ACN + 0.125% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min across the column. The scan sequence for the mass spectrometer began with an MS1 spectrum, followed with the ‘Top N” (the top 10 precursors) isolation in the quadrupole, CID fragmentation and MS2 detection in the ion trap. Finally, the top ten fragment ion precursors from each MS2 scan were selected for MS3 analysis (synchronous precursor selection, SPS), in which precursors were fragmented by HCD prior to Orbitrap analysis. More information related to the mass spectrometer set up for each TMT is included in Supplemental Table 5.

### Data Protocol
A suite of in-house software tools was used for .RAW file processing. Searches against a Uniprot mouse or human database (February 2014) were performed using Sequest. Both the forward and reverse sequences, and most common contaminants were included in the database. Database search criteria were as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages and 2 modifications per peptide, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.0 Da, static modifications of cysteines (alkylation, 57.0215 Da), TMT labeling of lysines and N-termini of peptides (+229.1629 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da). Controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides were applied as previously described (PMID: 21183079 and 29734811). Each analysis used an SPS-MS3-based TMT method, which has been shown to reduce ion interference compared to MS2 quantification (PMID: 27400695). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003-Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. Peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (<100 summed signal-to-noise across 10 channels and <0.7 precursor isolation specificity). Peptides with a CV < 20 % within each replicate group were used for protein quantification. UBQLN1 and UBQLN2 proteins were quantified using unique peptides. Final protein quantification results were used for pathway analysis. Enrichment of GO-terms (CC, Cellular Component; MF, Molecular Function; and BP, Biological Process) was performed using the clusterProfiler R package (PMID: 22455463). For these analyses, all proteins significantly up- or down-regulated between WT and littermate mutant animals were selected. For the GO analysis of each TMT, all proteins quantified in the TMT were used as background.

### Publication Abstract
Familial neurodegenerative diseases commonly involve mutations that result in either aberrant proteins or dysfunctional components of the proteolytic machinery that act on aberrant proteins. UBQLN2 is a ubiquitin receptor of the UBL/UBA family that binds the proteasome through its ubiquitin-like domain and is thought to deliver ubiquitinated proteins to proteasomes for degradation. UBQLN2 mutations result in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/frontotemporal dementia in humans through an unknown mechanism. Quantitative multiplexed proteomics was used to provide for the first time an unbiased and global analysis of the role of Ubqln2 in controlling the composition of the proteome. We studied several murine models of Ubqln2-linked ALS and also generated Ubqln2 null mutant mice. We identified impacts of Ubqln2 on diverse physiological pathways, most notably serotonergic signaling. Interestingly, we observed an upregulation of proteasome subunits, suggesting a compensatory response to diminished proteasome output. Among the specific proteins whose abundance is linked to UBQLN2 function, the strongest hits were the ubiquitin ligase TRIM32 and two retroelement-derived proteins, PEG10 and CXX1B. Cycloheximide chase studies using induced human neurons and HEK293&#xa0;cells suggested that PEG10 and TRIM32 are direct clients. Although UBQLN2 directs the degradation of multiple proteins via the proteasome, it surprisingly conferred strong protection from degradation on the Gag-like protein CXX1B, which is expressed from the same family of retroelement genes as PEG10. In summary, this study charts the proteomic landscape of ALS-related Ubqln2 mutants and identifies candidate client proteins that are altered in&#xa0;vivo in disease models and whose degradation is promoted by UBQLN2.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Ubiquitin ligase, Neurodegeneration, Proteomics, Als, Ubqln2, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Finley and Gygi lab Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School US

### Submitter
Miguel Prado

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Finley
Finley and Gygi lab Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School US


