### Accession
PXD016600

### Title
Human NEK10 knockout airway ALI Fe-IMAC-MSMS

### Description
We identified inactivating mutations in NEK10, a poorly characterized human protein kinase, in a novel human bronchiectasis syndrome. In order to understand effects of  loss of its function on the airway phosphoproteome, NEK10 was CRISPR/Cas9 targeted in human airway air-liquid interface (ALI) cultures with 2 independent guides and assayed by iron-enrichment phosphoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
ALI cultures were grown to maturity, washed in PBS, and lysed in urea lysis buffer containing: 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 9.0 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate (activated), 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mM ß-glycerol-phosphate. Lysates were protease-digested prior to phosphopeptide enrichment using immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (Fe-IMAC). Eluted peptides were then subjected to LC-MS/MS Analysis using an Orbitrap-Fusion Lumos (ESI-HCD dissociation) and the resulting spectra analyzed with the SEQUEST algorithm. Each biological sample was run in duplicate injections.

### Data Protocol
Searches were performed against the most recent update of the Uniprot Homo sapiens database with mass accuracy of +/-50ppm for precursor ions and 0.02Da for product ions. Results were filtered with mass accuracy of +/-5ppm on precursor ions and presence of the intended motif. This dataset yielded 56,540 redundant modified peptide assignments to 14,805 modified sites.

### Publication Abstract
Mucociliary clearance, the physiological process by which mammalian conducting airways expel pathogens and unwanted surface materials from the respiratory tract, depends on the coordinated function of multiple specialized cell types, including basal stem cells, mucus-secreting goblet cells, motile ciliated cells, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)-rich ionocytes, and immune cells<sup>1,2</sup>. Bronchiectasis, a syndrome of pathological airway dilation associated with impaired mucociliary clearance, may occur sporadically or as a consequence of Mendelian inheritance, for example in cystic fibrosis, primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), and select immunodeficiencies<sup>3</sup>. Previous studies have identified mutations that affect ciliary structure and nucleation in PCD<sup>4</sup>, but the regulation of mucociliary transport remains incompletely understood, and therapeutic targets for its modulation are lacking. Here we identify a bronchiectasis syndrome caused by mutations that inactivate NIMA-related kinase 10 (NEK10), a protein kinase with previously unknown in vivo functions in mammals. Genetically modified primary human airway cultures establish NEK10 as a ciliated-cell-specific kinase whose activity regulates the motile ciliary proteome to promote ciliary length and mucociliary transport but which is dispensable for normal ciliary number, radial structure, and beat frequency. Together, these data identify a novel and likely targetable signaling axis that controls motile ciliary function in humans and has potential implications for other respiratory disorders that are characterized by impaired mucociliary clearance.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Nek10, Airway

### Affiliations
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Raghu Chivukula

### Lab Head
Dr David M. Sabatini
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA


