### Accession
PXD039415

### Title
Murine BM neutrophil WT vs KI experiment 1

### Description
Murine neutrophils derived from bone marrow of wild-type and cPLA2alpha-knockin mice (with the C1P interaction site of cPLA2alpha ablated) proteomes were compared

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow harvested from mouse femurs, neutrophils separated via centrifiugation on a Percoll gradient, washed with HBSS and pelleted

### Data Protocol
Proteins were solubilized with 5% SDS, 50mM TEAB (pH 7.6), incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes, and sonicated at 20% amplitude.  Protein concentrations will be determined using the Pierce 660 Assay (Thermo Scientifc), and equal amounts of protein will be digested using S-traps (Protifi).  Briefly, proteins are reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA), acidified using phosphoric acid, and combined with s-trap loading buffer (90% MeOH, 100mM TEAB).  Proteins are loaded onto s-traps, washed, and finally digested with Trypsin/Lys-C overnight at 37˚C.  Peptides are eluted and dried with a vacuum concentrator.  Peptides are resuspended in H2O/0.1% formic acid for global proteome LC-MS/MS analysis.  Peptides are separated using a 75 µm x 50 cm C18 reversed-phase-HPLC column (Thermo Scientific) on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) with a 120 minute gradient (2-32% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) and analyzed on a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Full MS survey scans were acquired at 70,000 resolution.  The top 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS analysis.  Raw data files are processed in MaxQuant (www.maxquant.org) and searched against the current Uniprot human protein sequences database.  Search parameters include constant modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation and the variable modification, methionine oxidation.  Proteins are identified using the filtering criteria of 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate.  Label free quantitation analysis was performed using Perseus, software developed for the analysis of omics data (Cox & Mann, 2014 & 2016). Briefly, intensities were Log2-transformed, and then filtered to include proteins containing at least 60% valid values (reported LFQ intensities) in at least one experimental group.  Finally, the missing values in the filtered dataset are replaced using the imputation function in Perseus with default parameters (Cox & Mann, 2016).  Statistical analyses are carried out using the filtered and imputed protein groups file.  Statistically significant changes in protein abundance are determined using Welch’s t-test p-values and z-scores.

### Publication Abstract
Uncontrolled inflammation is linked to poor outcomes in sepsis and wound healing, both of which proceed through distinct inflammatory and resolution phases. Eicosanoids are a class of bioactive lipids that recruit neutrophils and other innate immune cells. The interaction of ceramide 1-phosphate (C1P) with the eicosanoid biosynthetic enzyme cytosolic phospholipase A<sub>2</sub> (cPLA<sub>2</sub>) reduces the production of a subtype of eicosanoids called oxoeicosanoids. We investigated the effect of shifting the balance in eicosanoid biosynthesis on neutrophil polarization and function. Knockin mice expressing a cPLA<sub>2</sub> mutant lacking the C1P binding site (<i>cPLA<sub>2</sub></i>&#x3b1;<i><sup>KI/KI</sup></i> mice) showed enhanced and sustained neutrophil infiltration into wounds and the peritoneum during the inflammatory phase of wound healing and sepsis, respectively. The mice exhibited improved wound healing and reduced susceptibility to sepsis, which was associated with an increase in anti-inflammatory N2-type neutrophils demonstrating proresolution behaviors and a decrease in proinflammatory N1-type neutrophils. The N2 polarization of <i>cPLA<sub>2</sub></i>&#x3b1;<i><sup>KI/KI</sup></i> neutrophils resulted from increased oxoeicosanoid biosynthesis and autocrine signaling through the oxoeicosanoid receptor OXER1 and partially depended on OXER1-dependent inhibition of the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). Thus, C1P binding to cPLA<sub>2</sub>&#x3b1; suppresses neutrophil N2 polarization, thereby impairing wound healing and the response to sepsis.

### Keywords
Neutrophil, Cpla2alpha

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University of South Florida Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology & Oncology, University of Virginia Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University-School of Medicine Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia Program in Cancer Biology, University of Virginia Cancer Center Research Service, Richmond Veterans Administration Medical Center
University of South Florida

### Submitter
Kenneth Maus

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Edward Chalfant
Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University of South Florida Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology & Oncology, University of Virginia Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University-School of Medicine Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia Program in Cancer Biology, University of Virginia Cancer Center Research Service, Richmond Veterans Administration Medical Center


