### Accession
PXD039923

### Title
Proteomic comparison of human milk, cow's milk and infant formula extracellular vesicles

### Description
Milk and milk products such as infant formula (IF) play a fundamental role in serving the nutritional needs of the developing infant. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) in human (HM) and cow’s milk (CM) contain molecular cargo such as proteins and micro(mi)RNA that serve as functional messengers between cells and may be of importance to infant health. Here, we have developed a pipeline using advanced proteomics and transcriptomics to enable cross-species comparison of milk and IF EVs. EVs from HM, CM and IF were subjected to data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry and RNA-seq. Differentially abundant proteins (143) and miRNAs (514) (false discovery rate < 0.01) were identified in HM and CM EVs, and CM EV proteins and miRNAs were conserved in IF EVs (~20-90%). We foresee this work to be used in large scale studies to determine biologically relevant species-specific differences in milk EVs that could be leveraged to improve IF products.

### Sample Protocol
A volume corresponding to 50 µg of total protein was used for proteomic sample preparation for each sample type. EV protein extracts were solubilised in 1-2% sodium deoxycholate lysis buffer and processed as previously described (N. Turner et al., 2022). In brief, following the addition of lysis buffer, samples were sonicated for 2 min in an ice bath and incubated on ice for 20 min with gentle rocking. Samples containing lysis buffer were loaded onto 30K centrifugal filters (PALL, Brisbane, Australia) and centrifuged. All centrifugation steps were performed at 14,000 x g for 15 min at 21 °C. On-filter reduction was performed with 200 µL of 25 mM DTT for 1 hr at RT with gentle agitation. Filters were centrifuged and membranes washed once with 200 µL of 8M urea. Alkylation was performed by adding 100 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide to the filters and incubating in the dark for 20 min at RT with gentle agitation. The filters were centrifuged and washed twice with 200 µL of 8M urea, followed by two additional washes with 200 µL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.5 – 8.5 (AMBIC). Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) stock was diluted in 100 mM AMBIC (0.1 µg/µL) and added to the filters at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50. Overnight digestion was performed at 37 °C in a humidified chamber. The next day, filters were transferred to clean 1.5 mL protein lo-bind tubes (Eppendorf, Sydney, Australia) and centrifuged to collect peptides. One more elution was performed by adding 60 µL AMBIC to the filters and centrifuging as per previous step. Peptides were acidified by adding an appropriate volume of 4% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a minimum final concentration of 0.1%. HM and CM peptides resulting from the previous step were desalted using peptide desalting spin columns (Thermofisher Scientific, Brisbane, Australia), according to manufacturer’s instructions. IF peptides were desalted using double SCX Stagetips as previously described (N. Turner et al., 2022). Desalted peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Speedvac, Eppendorf, Sydney, Australia) and resuspended in 16 µL indexed retention time (iRT) buffer (Biognosys-11). All peptide samples were analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as previously described(N. Turner et al., 2022). Four µg of peptides were injected for each MS run. Reversed-phase chromatography and trapping for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 μL/min were conducted, followed by separation on an Eksigent ChromXP C18 3 μm 120 Å (3C18-CL-120, 3 μm, 120 Å, 0.3 x 150 mm) analytical column at a flow rate of 5 μL/min maintained at 40 °C. Trapping, mobile phase A and mobile phase B were as previously described (N. Turner et al., 2022). Peptides were separated by 68 min linear gradient of 3-25% mobile phase B followed by 5 min linear gradient of 25-35% mobile phase B. After peptide elution, the column was flushed with 80% mobile phase B for 3 min and re-equilibrated with 97% A for 8 min before the next injection. Mass spectrometry was conducted on a Triple Time-of-flight (TOF) 5600 (SCIEX) instrument equipped with DuoSpray Ion Source configured for micro flow HPLC applications. For spectral library generation (qualitative runs), a non-fractionated pooled biological quality control (PBQC) sample was analysed using Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) approach. For quantitation purposes, individual samples (equalised first at the protein level and then again post-digestion at the peptide level, using iRT buffer) were analysed using a variant of Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) approach termed Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS) after optimisation of sample loading into the instrument using the PBQC sample. Additionally, a minimum of two replicate injections of PBQC sample were acquired using the SWATH method during analysis of the quantitative batch for quality control purposes. All peptide samples were analysed by SWATH-MS for relative quantitation and protein identification. Parameters for SWATH-MS were identical to those of DDA, except TOF MS scans were performed over a range of m/z 400 – 1000 (HM EVs) or m/z 400 – 900 (CM and IF EVs), specific to species as determined from DDA scans. MS/MS TOF scans were performed over a range of m/z 100 – 1800 in both cases. There were 60 overlapping SWATH windows for all samples with a m/z overlap of 1, as originally described by Gillet et al. (2012), with some modification. Full details of the SWATH variable windows used for each species can be found in Supplementary file 1 (Gillet et al., 2012). The period cycle time for HM and CM EV samples was 2.2 s and 3.1 s, respectively. A minimum of 6 data points were collected per peak.

### Data Protocol
To generate a combined species library, reference proteome sequences for Bos taurus and Homo sapiens were combined into one file (FASTA format), including cRAP and iRT peptide sequences. In silico digest was performed in DIA-NN to generate a predicted spectral library with the following settings: Deep learning enabled; FDR 0.01; min peptide length = 6; max peptide length = 30; precursor min m/z = 400; precursor max m/z = 1000; min fragment m/z 100; max fragment m/z 1800; Protease = Trypsin/P; Missed cleavages = 1; Max number variable modifications = 3; N-terminal methionine excision enabled; cysteine carbidiomethylation set as fixed modification; Methionine oxidation enabled as variable modification  (Demichev, Messner, Vernardis, Lilley, & Ralser, 2020). Raw data files containing SWATH-MS data (.wiff format) were imported into DIA-NN for processing and converted to .dia format (Demichev et al., 2020). Experimental files for HM and CM EVs (.dia format) were searched against the combined species library with the addition of the following settings: (MS2) mass accuracy = 15 ppm; MS1 mass accuracy = 20 ppm; remove likely interferences enabled; use isotopologues enabled; Neural network classifier = Double-pass mode; Protein inference = Genes; Quantification strategy = Robust LC (high accuracy); Cross-run normalisation = RT and signal-dependent (experimental); Library generation = Smart profiling. HM, CM and IF EV samples were processed separately using the settings as above and searched against either the Homo sapiens (HM) or Bos taurus (CM and IF) proteome. In silico digest of the relevant reference proteome with cRAP and iRT sequences was performed as above, with one changed setting for Bos taurus proteome search: precursor max m/z = 900. The generated report files (.tsv) were imported into R Studio for peptide quantitation using packages MsStats, diann and dplyr for Volcano plot generation (data normalisation = equalise medians; significance = adjusted p < 0.05; fold change cut-off = 2). R packages ggbiplot and tidyverse were used to plot principal component analysis (PCA). For the combined HM and CM report file, filtering was applied in R to include proteins common to both species based on peptide homology, and peptide quantitative comparisons were performed using homologous peptide sequences only. Species-specific searches were also performed individually for HM and CM data by generating separate human and bovine libraries, created using in silico digest of reference proteome sequences (including iRT and cRAP sequences) and searched against experimental data files as described above.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Milk; infant formula; extracellular vesicles; proteomics; swath; mass spectrometry; transcriptomics

### Affiliations
Centre for Children's Health Research (CCHR) Queensland University of Technology 62 Graham Street South Brisbane, QLD 4101 AUSTRALIA
Queensland University of Technology

### Submitter
Natalie Turner

### Lab Head
Dr Murray D. Mitchell
Centre for Children's Health Research (CCHR) Queensland University of Technology 62 Graham Street South Brisbane, QLD 4101 AUSTRALIA


