### Accession
PXD007154

### Title
Integrative proteomics reveals a protective role of PRC2 for the ground state pluripotent epigenome

### Description
The ground state of pluripotency is defined as a basal proliferative state free of epigenetic restriction, represented by mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) cultured with two kinase inhibitors (so-called “2i”). Through comparison with serum-grown ESCs, we identify epigenetic features characterizing 2i ESCs by proteome profiling of chromatin including post-translational histone modifications. The most prominent difference is H3K27me3 and its enzymatic writer complex PRC2 that are highly abundant on eu- and heterochromatin in 2i ESCs, with H3K27me3 redistributing outside canonical PRC2 targets in a CpG-dependent fashion. Using PRC2-deficient 2i ESCs, we identify epigenetic crosstalk with H3K27me3, including significant increases in H4 acetylation and DNA methylation. This suggests that the unique H3K27me3 configuration protects 2i ESCs from preparation to lineage priming. Interestingly, removal of DNA methylation in PRC2-deficient 2i ESCs lacking H3K27me3 using 5-azacytidine hardly affected ESC viability and transcriptome, showing that ESCs are independent of both major repressive epigenetic marks.

### Sample Protocol
For whole cell proteomes, cells were lysed in RIPA buffer and briefly sonicated to ensure complete cell lysis. For chromatin isolation, cells were first exposed to hypotonic salt concentration and the nuclei separated from the cytoplasm using mechanical douncing. Next the nuclei were incubated in hypertonic salt concentration to isolate the nucleoplasm. The remaining chromatin pellet was resuspended in 4 volumes of RIPA buffer and sonicated to solubilize the pellet. The entire procedure is described in Dignam et al, 1983. For both chromatin and whole cell proteomes, we used Filter Aided Sample Preparation and StageTips to prepare protein mixtures for LC-MS (as described in Rappsilber et al, 2007). For AP-MS experiments, GFP-pulldown experiments were performed on 2mg nuclear extract generated as described above. The immunoprecipitated protein complexes were on-bead digested and prepared for MS using StageTips. The PICh procedure was performed essentially as in Saksouk et al, 2014. After decrosslinking of the purified proteins, the extracts were separated on a SDS-PAGE gel and each lane was cut into six fractions, followed by in-gel digestion and by MS identification. For pulldown experiments, peptides were eluted from the column using a 2-hour gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 80%) and B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile). For whole cell and chromatin proteomes, the same gradient was used but for 4 hours. Mass spectrometry measurements were performed on either an LTQ-Orbitrap Q-exactive, an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid ( both from Thermo Scientific)   For histone MS, histones were acid extracted and proprionylated before Trypsin digestion. Histone PTMs were measured using a Q‐TOF SYNAPT G2‐Si instrument (Waters). 9 μl injection on-column contained 1.5μg histones and 50fmol beta galactosidase (Sciex) / MPDS (Waters) internal digest standards in 0.1% FA. Quality control samples (QC) were made by mixing 5μl of each sample. Peptides were separated using low pH reverse phase gradient on the NanoLC™ 425 system operating in microflow mode. A Triart C18 150 x 0.3mm column (YMC) was used at 5 μL/min flow rate (0.1%FA with 3% DMSO) with a 60 min gradient from 3-55% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for a total run time of 75min per sample. The sample list was randomized and interspersed with QC injections. Each cycle consisted in one full MS1 scan (m/z 400-1250) of 250 ms followed by MS2 data-dependent trigger events (m/z 65-2000, high sensitivity mode). A maximum of 10 candidate ions (charge state +2 to +5) exceeding 300 cps were monitored per cycle and excluded for 10s, with an accumulation time of 200 ms and using a rolling collision energy (CE) with a spread of 15V. Cycle time was 2.3 s, in order to have 10 to 12 data points per LC peak.

### Data Protocol
Raw data of all experiments except histone PTM measurements were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.1.0 with default parameters. LFQ and IBAQ values were generated. Match between runs was switched on for all runs that were analyzed together. Potential contaminants and reverse hits were filtered using Perseus. Proteins that were not reproducibly quantified (i.e. in less than half of the datasets) were removed from the protein list before imputing missing values from the normal distribution using default settings.  For analysis of histone PTMs, we aimed to perform untargeted screening of all relevant hPTMs and overcome ambiguity of annotation, we performed data analysis using an established method described in (Willems et al., 2017). Briefly, raw data from all runs were imported and aligned in Progenesis QIP 3.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters) for feature detection. Feature detection was manually validated for all annotated histone features to resolve isobaric near-coelution (*.Archive file available upon request). For identification, per feature three MSMS spectra closest to the elution apex were selected and exported for searches using Mascot (Matrix Science). To ensure untargeted screening, six searches were performed, each using six different PTM sets. The searched PTM sets were determined as follows: all selected MSMS spectra were merged in a single *.mgf file. A standard search without biological modifications was performed using a complete mouse Swissprot database (downloaded from Uniprot on 01/17/17 and supplemented with contaminants from the cRAP database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/)) to identify the proteins present in the sample (assuming at least a single non-modified peptide can be detected for each protein). From these proteins a FASTA database was generated and all curated PTMs were retrieved from SwissProt and the Cell Snapshot from (Huang et al., 2014). For each feature, all candidate modified peptides in this database were determined based on their MS1 mass. Based on the frequency of each PTM (combination) with respect to the features and modified peptide candidates, the most abundant candidate sets of PTM combinations were selected sequentially. With the inclusion of more sequential searches, the percentage (comprehensiveness) of all considered modified peptide candidates increases. The six sequential searches performed here have a comprehensiveness of 68% of all possible explanations for the MS1 precursor masses found in the combined experiment (see supplementary Table 2). Per search, the top 10 highest scoring (abovethreshold) annotations per MSMS were reimported into Progenesis QIP. For each feature, all identifications from all searches from all MSMS spectra were exported with Progesis' "Export all Identifications" option. All annotations were analyzed using python to determine per individual modified peptide isoform if a) it is biologically modified, b) these biological modifications are curated (i.e. are known to exist in curated literature/databases), c) this annotation was made on more than one MSMS spectrum (belonging to the same feature) and thus is reproducible. Finally, all labeled annotations were linked back to their respective features and classified based on their reproducibility and ambiguity (more than one curated annotation above score threshold) and manually curated by an expert in rare cases. Importantly, only previously reported PTMs were retained in this workflow.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prc2, Histone modifications, Pluripotency, Mouse embryonic stem cells, Chromatin profiling

### Affiliations
Radboud University
Molecular Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Nijmegen, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Guido van Mierlo

### Lab Head
Dr Hendrik Marks
Molecular Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Nijmegen, the Netherlands


