### Accession
PXD002416

### Title
Rat utricle hair bundles and whole utricles—LTQ

### Description
Purified utricle hair bundles and utricular epithelium from P3-P7 rat inner ears were analyzed by LC-MS/MS to determine the abundant and enriched proteins of the hair bundle. This dataset used a Thermo LTQ mass spectrometer for protein detection.

### Sample Protocol
Hair bundles were purified from biological-replicate sets of 100 rat ears each using the twist-off method, which captures bundles in agarose. Utricles were dissected whole; ~10 ears were used for each biological replicate. Proteins of bundle and epithelium replicates were separated by a short SDS-PAGE run, and six gel slices were prepared for each replicate. Proteins in the gel slices were reduced, alkylated, and subjected to trypsin digestion. Peptides were recovered and subjected to LC-MS/MS using a Thermo LTQ ion-trap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Comet version 2014.02 rev 2 was used to match MS2 spectra from .RAW files to a FASTA file for the Rattus norvegicus Ensembl database. An in-house processing pipeline (PAW) was used to select peptides, match them to proteins, and group proteins with shared peptides. For each peptide identification, the total intensity of the top 50 most intense fragment ions were computed (MS2 intensity). The total sum of MS2 intensities of all peptides mapped to respective proteins were used as proxies for protein abundances (protein intensity). To determine the relative molar abundance (im) for each protein or protein group in each bundle or epithelium replicate, the protein intensity was first divided by molecular mass, and then was normalized by the sum of all protein intensity/mass values (excluding contaminant and decoy entries).

### Publication Abstract
Examination of multiple proteomics datasets within or between species increases the reliability of protein identification. We report here proteomes of inner-ear hair bundles from three species (chick, mouse, and rat), which were collected on LTQ or LTQ Velos ion-trap mass spectrometers; the constituent proteins were quantified using MS2 intensities, which are the summed intensities of all peptide fragmentation spectra matched to a protein. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD002410 (chick LTQ), PXD002414 (chick Velos), PXD002415 (mouse Velos), and PXD002416 (rat LTQ). The two chick bundle datasets compared favourably to a third, already-described chick bundle dataset, which was quantified using MS1 peak intensities, the summed intensities of peptides identified by high-resolution mass spectrometry (PXD000104; updated analysis in PXD002445). The mouse bundle dataset described here was comparable to a different mouse bundle dataset quantified using MS1 intensities (PXD002167). These six datasets will be useful for identifying the core proteome of vestibular hair bundles.

### Keywords
Stereocilia, Hair cells, Utricle, Vestibular

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland, OR, USA
Oregon Hearing Research Center

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland, OR, USA


