### Accession
PXD010669

### Title
Necator americanus secretome - In the current project we have carried out the first proteogenomic analysis of a parasitic helminth

### Description
In the current project we have carried out the first proteogenomic analysis of a parasitic helminth. This has allowed us to significantly improve the genome annotation and provide a robust characterisation of the ES proteome from the adult N. americanus.  Our findings show important information on key families of proteins with both known and unknown functions which may be instrumental for host-parasite interactions, parasite survival and immune regulation. Description of these proteins is useful for informing future identification of vaccine and drug targets, diagnostics and novel therapeutics for treating autoimmune and allergic diseases.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 30 µg and 70 µg of N. americanus adult ES products was electrophoresed on a 12% an SDS-PAGE or OFFGEL fractionator respectively, trypsin digested and analysed by LC-MS/MS.  For L3 somatic digests, lysis buffer (3 M Urea, 0.2% SDS, 1% Triton X, 50 mM Tris-HCl) was added to 6,000 larvae before repeated vortexing and sonication. Extract was passed through a 0.45um filter before SDS-PAGE fractionation. For adult somatic digests, whole worms were ground under liquid nitrogen before solubilisation in lysis buffer (0.1% (w/v) SDS, 1.0% (v/v) Triton X-100 in 40 mM Tris, pH 7.4), subjected to OFFGEL and SDS-PAGE fractionation and analysed by LC-MS/MS. All samples were analysed on a Shimadzu Prominance Nano HPLC (Japan) coupled to a Triple Tof 5600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Canada) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Mascot version 2.5 (Matrix Science), X!Tandem (The Global Proteome Machine Organisation) version Jackhammer and Comet v2014.02 rev.2 were used to analyse data from the mass spectrometer. Searches were carried out against a database comprised of the N. americanus genome published in 2014, appended to the common repository of adventitious proteins (cRAP; http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) database (to detect potential contamination). The following parameters were used: enzyme, trypsin; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; maximum missed cleavages, 2; precursor ion mass tolerance, 50 ppm; fragment ion tolerance 0.1 Da; charge states, 2+, 3+ 4+. A false discovery rate of 0.1% was applied, and a filter of greater than 2 significant unique sequences was used to further improve the robustness of data.

### Publication Abstract
The human hookworm Necator americanus infects more than 400 million people worldwide, contributing substantially to the poverty in these regions. Adult stage N. americanus live in the small intestine of the human host where they inject excretory/secretory (ES) products into the mucosa. ES products have been characterized at the proteome level for a number of animal hookworm species, but until now, the difficulty in obtaining sufficient live N. americanus has been an obstacle in characterizing the secretome of this important human pathogen. Herein we describe the ES proteome of N. americanus and utilize this information along with RNA Seq data to conduct the first proteogenomic analysis of a parasitic helminth, significantly improving the available genome and thereby generating a robust description of the parasite secretome. The genome annotation resulted in a revised prediction of 3,425 fewer genes than initially reported, accompanied by a significant increase in the number of exons and introns, total gene length and the percentage of the genome covered by genes. Almost 200 ES proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS with SCP/TAPS proteins, 'hypothetical' proteins and proteases among the most abundant families. These proteins were compared to commonly used model species of human parasitic infections, including Ancylostoma caninum, Nippostrongylus brasiliensis and Heligmosomoides polygyrus. SCP/TAPS proteins are immunogenic in nematode infections, so we expressed four of those identified in this study in recombinant form and showed that they are all recognized to varying degrees by serum antibodies from hookworm-infected subjects from a disease-endemic area of Brazil. Our findings provide valuable information on important families of proteins with both known and unknown functions that could be instrumental in host-parasite interactions, including protein families that might be key for parasite survival in the onslaught of robust immune responses, as well as vaccine and diagnostic targets.

### Keywords
Proteins, Secretory products, Proteogenomics, Necator americanus, Secretome

### Affiliations
Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine James Cook University
James Cook University

### Submitter
Javier Sotillo

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Loukas
Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine James Cook University


