### Accession
PXD026905

### Title
Proteomic analysis of T-cruzi experimentally infected hamster cheeck pouch

### Description
Mast cells (MCs) were implicated in tissue remodelling in hamster models of heart inflammatory diseases. Here we   asked whether   MCs promote inflammatory neovascularization in hamster cheek pouch (HCP) parasitized by Trypanosoma cruzi, the protozoan that causes Chagas disease.  Intravital microscopy (IVM) performed 3 days after inoculation of Dm28c trypomastigote (GFP-TCTs) showed a subtle infiltration of rhodamine-labeled leukocytes. Interestingly, the baseline levels of FITC-dextran leakage (3 dpi) were consistently increased, raising the possibility that intracellular amastigotes may coopt the low-grade inflammation to facilitate the delivery of plasma-borne nutrients during the period in which host cells must metabolically sustain parasite division. Although proangiogenic indexes were only mildly stimulated at 3 dpi, we found a positive correlation with transcription of proinflammatory cytokines (pro-IL- and IFN-). Having established 3 dpi as a timepoint in which vascular remodeling was already measurable, we next compared the proteomic profiles of parasitized HCP with those of internal controls (PBS injected 3 days earlier in the contralateral pouch) we found 87 proteins upregulated, and 17 were downregulated in the parasitized HCP. Minor changes in protein expression were observed in response to PBS injection (2 upregulated and 12 downregulated proteins. Congruent with the increased density of MCs observed in parasitized HCP (histological analysis), the MC protease 1 (chymase) stood out as the most abundant sequence. Interestingly, toluidine blue staining appointed clusters of MCs degranulating at 3 dpi. Noteworthy, two plasma proteins (complement C3 and serum albumin) were also identified as major proteins, further suggesting that leaky capillaries irrigated the HCP at early stages (3 dpi) of infection . Detection of cytokines or classical proangiogenic factors was beyond the sensitivity of our methods.

### Sample Protocol
Syrian hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus) were injected with 106 tissue culture (LLC-MK2 cells) derived Dm28c TCTs (WT) or GFP-TCTs.  The animals were divided into two experimental groups (two hamsters per group): (i) injected with GFP-TCTs in the left cheek pouch, and (ii) injected with PBS in the left cheek pouch. The injected and contralateral tissues were excised seventy-two hours post-infection. The cheek pouches were gently washed with PBS, immediately stored in plastic tubes and frozen in liquid nitrogen. For protein extraction, the samples were thawed, weighted (100 – 120 mg) and homogenized using an electric tissue homogenizer. The homogenization was done in a buffer containing urea (7 M), thiourea (2 M), sodium deoxycholate (2%), and 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TBB, Sigma Aldrich). The tissue– buffer proportion used corresponded to 5 µl for 100 µg of tissue. After homogenization in the described buffer, the samples incubated for 1 hour (4ºC), followed by centrifugation (20,800xg during 30 min, 4ºC). The protein-rich supernatant was removed, and proteins were precipitated by the addition of four volumes (80%) of cold acetone and incubation overnight (4ºC). The protein pellet was washed twice using cold acetone and air-dried in ice for the elimination of acetone. Proteins were solubilized in a buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and TBB. Protein amounts were determined according to the instructions of Qubit kit (Invitrogen) and protein integrity was confirmed by gel electrophoresis. Disulfide bonds were reduced (10 mM1,4-dithiothreitol, 30 min, 30ºC), alkylated (40 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, room temperature, protected from light), and proteins digested with trypsin (Sequencing Grade Trypsin, Promega) (1 µg of trypsin for each 50 µg  protein, 18 h, 35ºC). Before trypsin digestion, the volume was completed with water in order to achieve a tenfold higher final volume and the pH was checked (≅8). Trypsin digestion was interrupted by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid in a final concentration of 0.1% (pH ≅ 2). After trypsin digestion, peptides were purified in a C-18 macro spin column (Harvard Apparatus), resuspended in water, and the number of purified peptides was determined. Ensuing peptides (33 µg per condition)were labeled with the isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ 4 plex – ABSciex), accordingly. Briefly, TBB was added to the samples in order to achieve the optimal pH 8 and labeling happened in a proportion of 30 % of the sample (aqueous phase) to 70% of the organic phase (ethanol). The iTRAQ reagents were incubated for one hour with the samples (room temperature). iTRAQ markers 114, 115, 116, and 117 were distributed to the following experimental conditions with two biological replicates for each one: GFP-TCTs-infected (left) cheek pouch, contralateral (right) cheek pouch of infected hamsters, PBS-injected cheek pouch of noninfected hamster, and contralateral cheek pouch of PBS-injected hamsters, respectively. The reaction was stopped by acidification, and achievement of equal proportions of the organic and aqueous phase, through the addition of 0.1% formic acid. The final pH was approximately 2. After labeling, the peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in a buffer (10 mM KH2PO4, and 25% acetonitrile (ACN), pH 3, for cation exchange and unbound iTRAQ removal. The cationic exchange was done in a proper Macro Spin Column (Harvard Apparatus), and the samples were separated in different fractions according to the concentrations of KCl used for elution (500 mM, 250 mM, 100 mM, and Flow-Through). After the cationic exchange, iTRAQ labeled peptides were purified in a C-18 Spin Column and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
After peptide quantification, the concentration was adjusted for 0.5 µg/µl and the analysis was performed in an LTQ Velos Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Each sample (biological replicate) was analyzed by three technical replicates. Proteins were identified by using the translated genome of Mesocricetus auratus available on NCBI  (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/Mesocricetus_auratus/protein/), downloaded on October 3rd, 2016. The analysis was performed using the Isobaric Analyzer available on the software Pattern Lab for Proteomics by selecting the two conditions experiment mode. The following statistical parameters were selected: P = 0.05, only unique peptides, at least one unique peptide, and fold change cutoff was set to 0.4. Proteins considered down or upregulated in each comparison and in both biological replicates were used for the final result and analyzed in Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Microangiopathy may worsen the clinical outcome of Chagas disease. Given the obstacles to investigating the dynamics of inflammation and angiogenesis in heart tissues parasitized by <i>Trypanosoma cruzi</i>, here we used intravital microscopy (IVM) to investigate microcirculatory alterations in the hamster cheek pouch (HCP) infected by green fluorescent protein-expressing <i>T. cruzi</i> (GFP-<i>T. cruzi</i>). IVM performed 3 days post-infection (3 dpi) consistently showed increased baseline levels of plasma extravasation. Illustrating the reciprocal benefits that microvascular leakage brings to the host-parasite relationship, these findings suggest that intracellular amastigotes, acting from inside out, stimulate angiogenesis while enhancing the delivery of plasma-borne nutrients and prosurvival factors to the infection foci. Using a computer-based analysis of images (3 dpi), we found that proangiogenic indexes were positively correlated with transcriptional levels of proinflammatory cytokines (pro-IL1&#x3b2; and IFN-&#x3b3;). Intracellular GFP-parasites were targeted by delaying for 24 h the oral administration of the trypanocidal drug benznidazole. A classification algorithm showed that benznidazole (&gt;24 h) blunted angiogenesis (7 dpi) in the HCP. Unbiased proteomics (3 dpi) combined to pharmacological targeting of chymase with two inhibitors (chymostatin and TY-51469) linked <i>T. cruzi</i>-induced neovascularization (7 dpi) to the proangiogenic activity of chymase, a serine protease stored in secretory granules from mast cells.

### Keywords
Cheeck pouch, Proteomics, Hamster

### Affiliations
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
UFRJ

### Submitter
Proteomics Unit

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Nogueira
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro


