### Accession
PXD002823

### Title
Modifications of the composition of the hyphal outerlayer of Aspergillus fumigatus affects HUVEC inflammatory and immune response

### Description
Aspergillus fumigatus is an angioinvasive fungal pathogen and the main etiologic agent causing invasive aspergillosis. Upon contact with human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), this fungus induces cellular injury, inflammatory response and a pro-thrombotic phenotype. The pathogen molecules involved in this processes are however still unknown. A. fumigatus hyphae have been shown to produce, both in vivo and in vitro, an extracellular matrix composed of galactomannan, galactosaminogalactan and α-(1,3)-glucan. The deletion of the UDP-Galp mutase results in a mutant with a very sticky phenotype, due to the increase in the galactosaminogalactan content in the cell surface. The overexpression of galactosaminogalactan in this mutant was confirmed by immunofluorescence microscopy with a monoclonal antibody. Interestingly, the adhesion of ∆ugm1 germlings to HUVECs was significantly higher in comparison to the wild type strain. The ∆ugm1 adhesion capacity was followed by an increment in the cytokine secretion and tissue factor expression by infected endothelial cells.  Using a shotgun proteomic approach with label-free quantification, we were able to search and compare pathways regulated in endothelial cells challenged with A. fumigatus, wild type and ∆ugm1. The deletion of the UGM1 gene in A. fumigatus induced changes in the endothelial cell response, maily related to immune and stress responses. In addition, the purified urea soluble fraction of galactosaminogalactan was able to induce TNF-α secretion by HUVECs and also regulate coincident pathways identified in the mutant interaction condition. This work describes for the first time the impact of the modifications of the hyphal surface galactosaminogalactan  on the endothelial cell responses to A. fumigatus.

### Sample Protocol
The HUVECs were obtained by treatment of umbilical veins with a 0.1% collagenase IV (Sigma) solution, as previously described by Jaffe et al., 1973. Primary cells were seeded onto 25 cm2 cell culture flasks coated with porcine skin gelatin and grown in supplemented tissue culture medium (M-199 medium containing 2 mM L-glutamine, penicillin, and streptomycin, and supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 10% bovine calf serum) at 37C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere until they reached confluence. In this study, primary cultures were used after one (P1) or two subcultures (P2). The subcultures were obtained by treatment of the confluent cells with 0.025% trypsin and 0.02% EDTA solution in PBS. This study was approved by Research Ethic Committee of the Municipal Health Secretaria and Civil Defense of Rio de Janeiro (CEP SMSDC-RJ), protocol no196/09. For the interaction with HUVECs, we used the following Aspergillus fumigatus strains: The Ku80 pyrG+ parental strain, the UGM1  mutant (Δugm1) and the reconstituted strain (Δugm1::ugm1). Its conidia were isolated and cultivated until it we obtain a homogenous suspension of germlings incubated in 0.02% thimerosal in PBS, overnight at 4C. A. fumigatus conidia and germlings were counted in a hemacytometer and adjusted to the desired concentration in supplemented tissue culture medium  (M-199 medium containing 2 mM L-glutamine, penicillin, and streptomycin, and supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 10% bovine calf serum) prior to use in the interaction experiments. For the proteomics experiments, HUVEC monolayers were infected with germlings of A. fumigatus WT and the ∆ugm1 strain as described above, and incubated with the purified SGG (1 µg/mL). Uninfected HUVEC monolayers (control) were maintained under the same conditions. After the interactions assays, endothelial cells were resuspended in 150 µL lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH7.5, 5mM EDTA, 10 mM EGTA, 50 mM NAF, 250 mM NaCl, supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (GE) and phosphatase inhibitors (20 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1M okadaic acid)) and incubated for 1 h at 4°C. After a freeze and thawing cicle, the cel lysate was centrifuged at 12000 x g, 30 min, the supernatants (protein extracts) were collected and stored at -80°C. The purified urea-soluble fraction of galactosaminogalactan (SGG) were purified as described previously (21).  Cellulose was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Missouri, USA). After extraction, the proteins were quantified by Bradford assay, 50 µg of each extract was concentrated, and had its lysis buffer exchanged with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate using a 3-kDa ultra-filtration device (Millipore). The proteins were denatured (0.1 % RapiGEST SF at 60 °C for 15 min) (Waters, Milford, USA), reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60 °C for 30 min), alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark) and enzymatically digested with trypsin at a 1:50 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio. This reaction was stopped by the addition of 10 µL 5 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and an internal standard, yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (P00330), was added to the digests to achieve 10 fmol.uL-1 per injection (Mbeunkui and Goshe, 2011; Panis et al., 2013). At least, three independent biological replicates of each experimental condition were considered for MSE analysis. Qualitative and quantitative bidimensional nanoUPLC tandem nanoESI-HDMSE experiments were conducted using both a 1 h reversed phase gradient from 7% to 40% (v/v) acetonitrile (0.1% v/v formic acid) and a 500 nL.min-1 on a nanoACQUITY UPLC 2D Technology system. A nanoACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 1.8 µm, 75 µm × 15 cm column (pH 3) was used in conjunction with a reverse phase (RP) XBridge BEH130 C18 5 µm 300 µm x 50 mm nanoflow column (pH 10). Typical on-column sample loads were 500 ng of total protein digests for each of the 5 fractions (500 ng/fraction/load). With a Synapt G2-S HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK), a multiplexed data-independent (DIA) scanning  was performed with added specificity and selectivity of a non-linear ‘T-wave’ ion mobility device (HDMSE).

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications and quantitative data package were generated by the use of dedicated algorithms and searching against a database with default parameters for ion accounting and quantitation. To access the false positive rate of identification, the utilized databases were reversed “on-the fly” during the database queries and appended to the original database. For proper spectra processing and database searching conditions, a Progenesis QI for Proteomics software package with Apex3D, Peptide 3D, and Ion Accouting informatics (Non-Linear Dynamics, Liverpool, UK) were used. UNIPROT protein databank with the specific annotations for human was used. Search conditions were based on taxonomy (Homo sapiens); maximum missed cleavages by trypsin allowed up to 1; variable modifications by carbamidomethyl (C), acetyl N-terminal, and oxidation (M); and a default FDR value at maximum 4%. The obtained proteins were organized by the software algorithm into a statistically significant list corresponding to increased and decreased regulation ratios between the different groups. Normalization was performed automatically by the software using default parameters. The protein interactions and pathways were analyzed in silico using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis Software (IPA-http://www.ingenuity.com); and the Reactome Pathway Database (www.reactome.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdmse, Interaction, Huvec, Galactosaminogalactan, Label-free, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Waters Corporation
State University of Rio de Janeiro

### Submitter
Gustavo Souza

### Lab Head
Dr Leila Maria Lopes Bezerra
State University of Rio de Janeiro


