### Accession
PXD020426

### Title
Heterotypic signaling between dermal fibroblasts and melanoma cells induces phenotypic plasticity and proteome rearrangement in malignant cells

### Description
The signaling events triggered by soluble mediators released from both transformed and stromal cells shape the phenotype of tumoral cells and have significant implications in cancer development and progression. In this study we performed an in vitro heterotypic signaling assay by evaluating the proteome diversity of human dermal fibroblasts after stimulation with the conditioned media obtained from malignant melanoma cells. In addition, we also evaluated the changes in the proteome of melanoma cells after stimulation with their own conditioned media as well as with the conditioned medium from melanoma-stimulated fibroblasts. Our results pointed out to a significant rearrangement in the proteome of stromal and malignant cells upon crosstalk of soluble mediators. The main proteome signature of stimulated cells was related to protein synthesis, which may indicate that this process might be an early response of stimulated stromal cells. In addition, the conditioned medium derived from ‘primed’ stromal cells (melanoma-stimulated fibroblasts) was more effective in altering the functional phenotype (cell migration) of malignant cells than the fibroblast conditioned medium alone. Collectively, self- and cross-stimulation may play a key role in shaping the tumor microenvironment and, more importantly, enable tumoral cells to succeed in the process of melanoma progression and metastasis. Although the proteome landscape of cells participating in such a heterotypic signaling represents a snapshot of a highly dynamic state, understanding the diversity of proteins and enriched biological pathways resulting from stimulated cell states may allow for targeting specific cell regulatory motifs involved in melanoma progression and metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
(for reference numbering, please refer to the associated publication)  Cell culture and conditioned media harvesting   Cell lines Hs 68 (CRL-1635TM), a dermal fibroblast from normal skin and A375 (CRL-1619TM), an epithelial cell derived from malignant melanoma from primary source, were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, USA). All cell lines were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) containing 1.5 g/L of sodium bicarbonate, 100 mg/L streptomycin, 25 mg/L ampicillin, 4 mM Glutamine and 10% of Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS). Cells were grown in a humidified incubator at 37 °C, with 5% CO2. The 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide assay (MTT) (Sigma, USA) was used for the evaluation of viability in cells subjected to the incubation with the different experimental treatments. Three conditioned media were used in this work, namely: (i) melanoma conditioned medium (MCM), which was obtained after culturing subconfluent A375 cells in T175 cm2 flasks for 24 h, under phenol red-free and FBS-free DMEM; (ii) stimulated fibroblast conditioned medium (sfCM), which was obtained after stimulating dermal fibroblasts (Hs68 cells) with 20% (vol/vol) of MCM in DMEM for 24 h; this stimulus was removed and cells were re-incubated for 12 h with FBS-free DMEM when the sfCM was collected; and (iii) a conditioned medium obtained from dermal fibroblasts incubated for 24 h in FBS-free DEMEM with no stimulus (fCM). For all the experimental conditions, the conditioned media were centrifuged (390 x g, 3 min, at room temperature) for removing any remaining cell, filtered (0.22 m; Millipore, USA) and stored at -80 ºC until use.  Cell treatments and lysis  Subconfluent cell cultures (in 100 mm-diameter culture dishes) were washed three-times with warm buffered phosphate-saline (PBS without Ca2+ and Mg2+) and subjected to the treatment with the three different conditioned media (MCM, sfCM or fCM) for 24h in a humidified incubator at 37 °C, with 5% CO2. Briefly, to investigate the effects of melanoma conditioned medium (MCM) upon cell cultures, dermal fibroblasts and melanoma cells (Hs68 and A375 cell lines, respectively) were incubated with 20% (vol/vol) of MCM in DMEM. In addition, the effects of the conditioned medium from MCM-stimulated fibroblasts were evaluated after incubating melanoma cells (A375 cell line) with either 20% (vol/vol) of sfCM or 20% (vol/vol) of fCM in DMEM. After 24h, cultures were subjected to mechanical lysis with a cell scrapper and 1 mL of cell lysis buffer (2% CHAPS, 150 mM NaCl in HEPES 50mM, pH 7.5) with the addition of a protease inhibitor cocktail (SIGMAFASTTM, Sigma, USA). Cell lysates were incubated in ice-bath for 30 min under mild agitation. After centrifugation (14,000 x g, 10 min, 4ºC) supernatants were removed, subjected to protein quantitation using the Bradford method [12] and stored at -80ºC until use. Cell lysates were independently obtained from three biological replicates derived from each cell line.  In-solution trypsin digestion The in-solution trypsin digestion was performed as described earlier [7]. Briefly, a solution of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) was added to a sample of 100 μg of protein from each cell lysate to a final concentration of 3 M GuHCl, followed by the addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration). The mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was then added to a final concentration of 15 mM and the samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature, in the dark. To quench the excess of IAA, DTT was added to a final concentration of 15 mM followed by the incubation of samples for 20 min at room temperature. Clean-up of samples was performed by the addition of ice-cold acetone (8 volumes) and methanol (1 volume), followed by the incubation of samples for 2 h at -80° C. After centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min, protein pellets were washed twice with one volume of ice cold methanol and then resolubilized with NaOH solution (final concentration of 10 mM), followed by the addition of HEPES buffer (final concentration of 50 mM), pH 7.5, to a final volume of 100 uL. Trypsin (Proteomics grade; Sigma, USA) was added at 1:100 ratio (enzyme/substrate) and protein samples were incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. Tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips [13], dried in a SpeedVac and redissolved in 50 L of 0.1% formic acid prior to nanoflow liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
(for reference numbering, please refer to the associated publication)  Proteomics data processing  Mass spectrometric (RAW) data were analyzed with MaxQuant software [14] (version 1.5.8.3). A False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1% was required for both protein and peptide-to-spectrum match identifications. LTQ-Orbitrap Velos raw data were searched against a target database restricted to the taxonomy ‘Homo sapiens’ (UniProt/SwissProt release 2019_06; 20,431 entries). This database was also combined with the sequences of 245 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and at least two missed cleavages were allowed; cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of 7 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Label-free quantitation was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm [15], with the ‘re-quantify’ and ‘match between runs’ functions of MaxQuant software enabled. As is observed from complex proteomes such as those of vertebrates, peptides can be shared between homologous proteins or splice variants, leading to “protein groups”. For each protein group in the MaxQuant’s ‘proteinGroups.txt’ file, the first protein entry was selected as representative.   Bioinformatic analyses Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least two unique peptides. Only proteins identified/quantified in the three biological replicates were selected for further analysis. All the protein intensity values were log2-transformed and quantile-normalized using the ‘preprocessCore’ library in R scripting and statistical environment [16,17]. Statistical analyses were performed using the ‘limma’ package in R/Bioconductor [18,19]. After fitting a linear model to the data, an empirical Bayes moderated t-test was used for the comparisons and p-values were adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Proteins with an adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05 and log2(fold change) > 1 and < -1 were considered to be differentially expressed. Correlations between replicates were also calculated in R, using Pearson correlation coefficient. Gene ontology enrichment analysis was carried out using STRING database [20] (https://string-db.org/); false discovery rates ≤ 0.05 were considered. Protein interaction network was built after obtaining high-confidence interactions (i.e. interaction scores ≥ 0.7) from the STRING database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cancer-associated fibroblasts, Phenotypic plasticity., Melanoma, Heterotypic signaling, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Functional Proteomics  -

Department of Science and Technology -
Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Jose dos Campos-SP, Brazil
Functional Proteomics Laboratory  Department of Science and Technology Federal University of São Paulo (ICT-UNIFESP) São José dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil Rua Talim, 330, 12231-280;  Tel +55 11 3385-4135 ext. 9727.

### Submitter
Andre Zelanis

### Lab Head
Dr André Zelanis
Functional Proteomics Laboratory  Department of Science and Technology Federal University of São Paulo (ICT-UNIFESP) São José dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil Rua Talim, 330, 12231-280;  Tel +55 11 3385-4135 ext. 9727.


