### Accession
PXD002536

### Title
A novel phosphorylation site at Ser130 adjacent to the pseudosubstrate domain regulates protein kinase C-δ activity

### Description
Protein kinase C over-expressed into rat neonatal myocytes were lysed in 8M Urea, 0.1% SDS and trypsin digested.  Peptides were fractionated by SPE-SCX and enriched by TiO2.  Phosphopeptides were analyzed by LC/MS on a Thermo LTQ Elite Orbitrap. Raw files were searched using Sorcerer-Sequest and post search analysis and processing was done with Scaffold and Scaffold PTM.

### Sample Protocol
Rat neonatal myocytes with over-expressed PKC delta, with and without Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) treatment, were lysed in 8M Urea, 1% SDS and trypsin digested.  Peptides were fractionated by SPE-SCX and 3 SCX fractions were enriched by TiO2. Tio2 enriched peptides were desalted on Oasis HLB micro-elution plates and dried in a speedvac.  Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and analyzed by LC/MS on a Thermo LTQ Elite Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using Sorcerer-Sequest and post search analysis and processing was done with Scaffold and Scaffold PTM. Phosphosites were quantified by spectral counting in Scaffold PTM and only sites with greater than 90% localization probability were included in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Protein kinase C-&#x3b4; (PKC&#x3b4;) is a signalling kinase that regulates many cellular responses. Although most studies focus on allosteric mechanisms that activate PKC&#x3b4; at membranes, PKC&#x3b4; also is controlled via multi-site phosphorylation [Gong et al. (2015) Mol. Cell. Biol. 35: , 1727-1740]. The present study uses MS-based methods to identify PKC&#x3b4; phosphorylation at Thr(50) and Ser(645) (in resting and PMA-treated cardiomyocytes) as well as Thr(37), Thr(38), Ser(130), Thr(164), Thr(211), Thr(215), Ser(218), Thr(295), Ser(299) and Thr(656) (as sites that increase with PMA). We focused on the consequences of phosphorylation at Ser(130) and Thr(141) (sites just N-terminal to the pseudosubstrate domain). We show that S130D and T141E substitutions co-operate to increase PKC&#x3b4;'s basal lipid-independent activity and that Ser(130)/Thr(141) di-phosphorylation influences PKC&#x3b4;'s substrate specificity. We recently reported that PKC&#x3b4; preferentially phosphorylates substrates with a phosphoacceptor serine residue and that this is due to constitutive phosphorylation at Ser(357), an ATP-positioning G-loop site that limits PKC&#x3b4;'s threonine kinase activity [Gong et al. (2015) Mol. Cell. Biol. 35: , 1727-1740]. The present study shows that S130D and T141E substitutions increase PKC&#x3b4;'s threonine kinase activity indirectly by decreasing G loop phosphorylation at Ser(357). A S130F substitution [that mimics a S130F single-nt polymorphism (SNP) identified in some human populations] also increases PKC&#x3b4;'s maximal lipid-dependent catalytic activity and confers threonine kinase activity. Finally, we show that Ser(130)/Thr(141) phosphorylations relieve auto-inhibitory constraints that limit PKC&#x3b4;'s activity and substrate specificity in a cell-based context. Since phosphorylation sites map to similar positions relative to the pseudosubstrate domains of other PKCs, our results suggest that phosphorylation in this region of the enzyme may constitute a general mechanism to control PKC isoform activity.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Protein kinase c, Pkc

### Affiliations
Cedar Sinai Medical Center
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Heart Institute Advanced Clinical and Biologial Research Institute USA

### Submitter
Ronald Holewinski

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Van Eyk
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Heart Institute Advanced Clinical and Biologial Research Institute USA


