### Accession
PXD028637

### Title
RPA promotes processive ssDNA digestion by Dna2 via their bimodal interaction in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) widely exists as intermediates in DNA metabolic pathways. The ssDNA binding protein, RPA, not only protects the integrity of ssDNA, but also directs the downstream factor that signals or repairs the ssDNA intermediate. However, it remains unclear how these enzymes/factors out-compete RPA and access to ssDNA. Using the budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as a model system, we discovered that Dna2, a key nuclease in DNA replication and repair, employs a bimodal interface to act with RPA both in cis and in trans. The cis-action renders RPA a processive unit for Dna2-catalyzed ssDNA digestion, where RPA actively delivers its bound ssDNA to Dna2. The trans-action mediated by an acidic patch from Dna2, on the other hand, enables Dna2  to operatie with a sub-optimal amount of RPA or to overcome DNA secondary structures. Genetically, this trans-action mode is not required for cell viability, but indispensable for successful DSB repair.

### Sample Protocol
For crosslinking experiments, Dna2 and RPA proteins were purified using a phosphate-based buffer system (pH 7.4), instead of the Tris-HCl buffer system, to avoid non-protein sourced primary amine groups in the crosslinking mixture, which can react with the crosslinking reagent, BS3 (bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] suberate, Thermo Fisher). To assess the interface between Dna2 and RPA in the presence of ssDNA substrate, Dna2 was incubated with RPA, with both present in solution at 1 μM, at room temperature for 30 min in the absence or the presence of dT(30) ssDNA (0.5 μM to 5 μM), in 25 µL crosslinking buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 400 μM BS3). A separate group with 30 μM dT replacing the dT(30) ssDNA was also set up. After incubation, the crosslinking experiments were quenched by the addition of 2 μL 1M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and the samples were subsequently analyzed with 4-15% gradient SDS-PAGE. In a similar strategy, Dna2 and RPA were incubated in the presence of a series of poly-dT ssDNA (dT(5), dT(10), dT(15), dT(20), dT(30) and dT(60)) at 1 μM or 10 μM in crosslinking buffer, and the reactions were quenched and analyzed with 4-15% gradient SDS-PAGE. Gel bands corresponding to cross-linked proteins were diced into 1 mm cubes. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM TCEP at 56°C for 45 min, and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at 21°C for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested with trypsin at 12.5 ng/μL for 16 hr. The resulting peptides were desalted using a ZipTip (Millipore). Tryptic peptides were injected into an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMapTM 100 C18 trap column (75μm × 20mm, 3μm, 100Å) in 0.1% formic acid.  The peptides were separated using an Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm × 150 mm, 2 μm, 100Å) using an acetonitrile-based gradient (Solvent A: 0% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. A 30 min gradient was as follows: 0-1.5min, 2-10% B; 1.5-31.5min, 10-45% B; 31.5-35min, 45-100% B; 35-40min, 100% B, followed by re-equilibration to 2% B. The electrospray ionization was carried out with a nanoESI source at a 260°C capillary temperature and 1.9 kV spray voltage. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with a scan range of 400-2000 m/z at the resolution of 120,000. The auto gain control target was set at 4 × 105. The precursor ions with charge states from 3 to 6 were selected for tandem mass (MS/MS) analysis in Orbitrap using HCD and CID at 35% collision energy.  The intensity threshold for MS2 was set at 5 × 104 and the Orbitrap resolution was set to 30,000. The dynamic exclusion was set with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 10 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The resulting data was searched in Protein Prospector (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm) against Dna2 and RPA sequences. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal methionine loss and pyroglutamine formation were set as variable modifications. Cross-linking search type was set as DSS (water-insoluble analog of BS3 which has the same mass addition). A total of three variable modifications were allowed. Trypsin digestion specificity with two missed cleavages was allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 5 ppm. As identifications of cross-linked peptides are only correct if both peptide components are correctly identified, crosslink identification confidence is largely a function of the less confident peptide. The resulting cross-linked peptides were manually validated and categorized into three groups: high confidence (designated as Rank 1 in column B of Suppl. Table), low confidence(designated as Rank 2), and mass-alone (designated as Rank 4). The high confidence group having at least three unique y or b-type framgnet ions derived from the lower scoring peptide of the pair. The low confidence group included crosslined peptides whose lower scoring peptide had only one or two unique fragment ions. The mass alone group meant the lowest scoring crosslinked peptide had fewer than six amino acid residues, such that there is a much-reduced chance of observing three unique fragment ions. The CID results, which were not illustrated in the cross-linking maps, were used for further validation of HCD results if the same cross-linked peptide pairs were identified in both fragmentation methods. The cross-linking maps were generated with XiNET (http://crosslinkviewer.org/index.php)

### Publication Abstract
Single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) commonly occurs as intermediates in DNA metabolic pathways. The ssDNA binding protein, RPA, not only protects the integrity of ssDNA, but also directs the downstream factor that signals or repairs the ssDNA intermediate. However, it remains unclear how these enzymes/factors outcompete RPA to access ssDNA. Using the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model system, we find that Dna2 - a key nuclease in DNA replication and repair - employs a bimodal interface to act with RPA both in cis and in trans. The cis-activity makes RPA a processive unit for Dna2-catalyzed ssDNA digestion, where RPA delivers its bound ssDNA to Dna2. On the other hand, activity in trans is mediated by an acidic patch on Dna2, which enables it to function with a sub-optimal amount of RPA, or to overcome DNA secondary structures. The trans-activity mode is not required for cell viability, but is necessary for effective double strand break (DSB) repair.

### Keywords
Ssdna, Rpa, Dna2, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 47405
Indiana University

### Submitter
Yixiang Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Hengyao Niu
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 47405


