### Accession
PXD007999

### Title
NRF2-dependent ECM -  Nrf2-Mediated Fibroblast Reprogramming Drives Cellular Senescence by Targeting the Matrisome

### Description
Nrf2-mediated fibroblast reprogramming drives cellular senescence by targeting the matrisome. ECM was isolated from WT and NRF2-/- mouse fibroblasts and analyzed by label-free quantification.

### Sample Protocol
ECM isolates were concentrated by ultrafiltration using vivaspin columns (30 kDa MWCO). Samples were heated in SDS‐PAGE loading buffer, reduced with 1 mM DTT for 10 min at 75°C and alkylated using 5.5 mM iodoacetamide for 10 min at room temperature. Protein mixtures were separated on 4-12% gradient gels (Nupage, Thermo Fisher). The gel lanes were cut into 5 equal slices, the proteins were in‐gel digested with trypsin (Promega) and the resulting peptide mixtures were processed on STAGE tips and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Mass spectrometric (MS) measurements were performed on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an EasyLC 1000 nanoflow–HPLC. HPLC–column tips (fused silica) with 75 µm inner diameter were self-packed with Reprosil–Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch) to a length of 20 cm. Samples were applied directly onto the column without a pre–column. A gradient of A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile in water) with increasing organic proportion was used for peptide separation (loading of sample with 0% B; separation ramp: from 5–30% B within 85 min). The flow rate was 250 nL/min and for sample application 600 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data–dependent mode and switched automatically between MS (max. of 1x106 ions) and MS/MS. Each MS scan was followed by a maximum of ten MS/MS scans using normalized collision energy of 25% and a target value of 1000. Parent ions with a charge state from z = 1 and unassigned charge states were excluded for fragmentation. The mass range for MS was m/z = 370–1750. The resolution for MS was set to 70,000 and for MS/MS for 17,500. MS parameters were as follows: spray voltage 2.3 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; ion–transfer tube temperature 250°C.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files were uploaded into the MaxQuant software version 1.4.1.2 for peak detection, generation of peak lists of mass error corrected peptides, and for database searches. A full-length UniProt mouse database additionally containing common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in–gel digestion (based on UniProt mouse FASTA version April 2016) was used as reference. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification and protein amino–terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. LFQ was chosen as quantitation mode. Three missed cleavages were allowed, enzyme specificity was trypsin/P, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The average mass precision of identified peptides was in general less than 1 ppm after recalibration. Peptide lists were further used by MaxQuant to identify and relatively quantify proteins using the following parameters: peptide and protein false discovery rates, based on a forward-reverse database, were set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to 7, minimum number of peptides for identification and quantitation of proteins was set to one which must be unique, minimum ratio count was set to two, and identified proteins were requantified. The ‘match-between-run’ option (2 min) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Nrf2 is a key regulator of the antioxidant defense system, and pharmacological Nrf2 activation is a promising strategy for cancer prevention and promotion of tissue repair. Here we show, however, that activation of Nrf2 in fibroblasts induces cellular senescence. Using a combination of transcriptomics, matrix proteomics, chromatin immunoprecipitation and bioinformatics we demonstrate that fibroblasts with activated Nrf2 deposit a senescence-promoting matrix, with plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 being a key inducer of the senescence program. In&#xa0;vivo, activation of Nrf2 in fibroblasts promoted re-epithelialization of skin wounds, but also skin tumorigenesis. The pro-tumorigenic activity is of general relevance, since Nrf2 activation in skin fibroblasts induced the expression of genes characteristic for cancer-associated fibroblasts from different mouse and human tumors. Therefore, activated Nrf2 qualifies as a marker of the cancer-associated fibroblast phenotype. These data highlight the bright and the dark sides of Nrf2 and the need for time-controlled activation of this transcription factor.

### Keywords
Senescence, Mouse, Nrf2, Matrisome, Fibroblast, Ecm

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Dep. of Biology University of Fribourg Chemin du Muséee 10 1700 Fribourg Switzerland

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dep. of Biology University of Fribourg Chemin du Muséee 10 1700 Fribourg Switzerland


