### Accession
PXD009277

### Title
Development of a parallel reaction monitoring-MS method to quantify IGF proteins in dogs: application to a canine case study of NICTH syndrome

### Description
Non–islet-cell tumor hypoglycemia (NICTH) is a rare paraneoplastic phenomenon seen in both dogs and humans. NICTH syndrome is derived from incompletely processed forms of insulin-like growth factor–II (IGF–II) by tumors, commonly named as big IGF–II. In the present study, a previously developed targeted PRM MS-based method for cats have been optimized and applied to simultaneously quantify the levels of IGF–I, IGF–II, and IGFBP–3, and for the first time, the levels of big IGF–II in dogs. This method allows the absolute quantification of these proteins using a mixture of QPrEST™ proteins previously designed for humans, reducing the variations due to the methodology, and the amount of serum needed for the analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The protein content in dog sera was measured using the Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). For normalization, the same volume of sera (which corresponded approximately to 30 µg of total protein) was taken from each dog, and submitted to in-solution digestion. Firstly, the volume was adjusted with 0.4 M NH4HCO3, 1 M Urea, pH 8 to a total volume of 200 µL, and then the QPrEST™ were spiked-into different concentrations depending on the study (see below). The samples were sonicated for 3 minutes and after that, 10 µL of 45 mM DTT was added and the samples were kept at 50°C for 15 minutes to reduce the proteins. To irreversibly carbamidomethylate the cysteines, 10 µL of 100 mM was added, followed by 15 minutes incubation at room temperature in darkness. For the digestion, 5% (w/w) of trypsin was added and the samples were incubated over night at 37°C. The heavy labelled synthetic peptide was then spiked-in and the samples were completely dried in a SpeedVac system. The samples were re-suspended in 40 µL 0.5% TFA and desalted using the SPE Pierce® C18 Spin Columns (ThermoFisher Scientific). These columns were activated by 2 x 200 µL of 50% ACN and equilibrated with 2 x 200 µL of 0.5% TFA. The tryptic peptides were adsorbed to the media using 2 repeated cycles of 40 µL sample loading and the column was washed using 2 × 200 μL 0.5% TFA. Finally, the peptides were eluted in 2 × 30 μL of 70% ACN and dried. Before they were analysed on a nanoLC-LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, the peptides were re-suspended in 160 µL of 0.1% FA in Milli-Q water.

### Data Protocol
The IGF–II and IGFBP–3 QPrEST™ proteins and the heavy labeled GPETLCGAELVDALQFVCGDR peptide were used in a spike-in experiment to determine the linearity and the repeatability of the targeted proteins, applying the PRM-method. For the calibration curves, the QPrEST™ were spiked into canine sera to final concentrations of 0.058, 0.29, 1.4, 7.2 and 36 fmol/μL for IGF–II, and 0.019, 0.094, 0.47 and 2.3 fmol/μL for IGFBP–3. The samples were then digested and thereafter, the GPETLCGAELVDALQFVCGDR peptide was spiked into the sample to final concentrations of 0.0024, 0.012, 0.059, 0.29 and 1.5 fmol/μL. These samples were analysed in triplicate. For the intraday repeatability study, and based on the ratios obtained in the calibration curves between the native and the synthetic peptides, three independent serum samples from the NICTH dog after surgical removal of the splenic tumor were spiked-in with the QPrEST™ or the heavy GPETLCGAELVDALQFVCGDR peptide, to obtain an approximate ratio of 1. The final concentration were 7.2 fmol/μL for IGF–II, and 0.47 fmol/μL for IGFBP–3. These samples were then digested and the GPETLCGAELVDALQFVCGDR peptide was spiked-in to a final concentration of 0.29 fmol/μL. These samples were analysed in triplicate, and all data were processed together (n=9). For the interday repeatability study, the same sample preparation was applied as for the intraday repeatability study, but in this case, serum from the dog before and after the surgery of the splenic tumor was used. The samples were prepared in three different and non-consecutive days and they were analysed in triplicate (n=9). For data analysis, the SkyLine software was applied to extract area under curve (AUC) of the fragments, and the built in tool Data Analysis in Microsoft Excel 2010 was used to perform linear regression and statistical evaluation

### Publication Abstract
Nonislet-cell tumor hypoglycemia (NICTH) is a rare paraneoplastic phenomenon well described in dogs and humans. Tumors associated with NICTH secrete incompletely processed forms of insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF-II), commonly named big IGF-II. These forms have increased bioavailability and interact with the insulin and IGF-I receptor causing hypoglycemia and growth-promoting effects. Immunoassays designed for human samples have been used to measure canine IGF-I and -II, but they possess some limitations. In addition, there are no validated methods for measurement of big IGF-II in dogs. In the present study, a targeted parallel reaction monitoring MS-based method previously developed for cats has been optimized and applied to simultaneously quantify the serum levels of IGF-I, IGF-II, and IGFBP-3, and for the first time, the levels of big IGF-II in dogs. This method allows the absolute quantification of IGF proteins using a mixture of QPrEST proteins previously designed for humans. The method possesses good linearity and repeatability and has been used to evaluate the IGF-system in a dog with NICTH syndrome. In this dog, the levels of big IGF-II decreased by 80% and the levels of IGF-I and IGFBP-3 increased approximately 20- and 4-times, respectively, after removal of the tumor.

### Keywords
Nicth, Dog proteomics, Igf, Prm

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Sciences, and Clinical Pathology Laboratory, University Animal Hospital, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.
Department of Chemistry-BMC, Analytical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden

### Submitter
Alberto Valdés

### Lab Head
Dr Emma M. Strage
Department of Clinical Sciences, and Clinical Pathology Laboratory, University Animal Hospital, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.


