### Accession
PXD014897

### Title
Salvage pathway maintains functional respiratory complex I

### Description
Regulation of the turnover of complex I (CI), the largest mitochondrial respiratory chain complex remains enigmatic, despite huge advancement in understanding its structure and the assembly steps in recent years. Although some studies indicated that CI might be remodelled in response to various stimuli, the mechanism mediating these putative changes is unknown.  Here, we report that the NADH-oxidising N-module which sits on the tip of the CI peripheral arm is turned over at a higher rate and largely independently of the rest of the complex. The N-module turnover is mediated by mitochondrial matrix protease ClpXP, which selectively removes and degrades damaged core subunits. The observed mechanism seems to be a safeguard against accumulation of dysfunctional CI arising from inactivation of the N-module subunits due to attrition caused by extensive redox activity. This CI salvage pathway maintains highly functional CI and healthy mitochondria through an energetically favourable mechanism that demands much lower energetic cost than de novo synthesis and reassembly of the entire CI.

### Sample Protocol
LR Complexome Profiling Heart mitochondria from 20 weeks old female animals (3+3) were isolated, quantified, solubilized with DDM and subjected to BN-PAGE as described above. The gel lanes were cut into 8 slices, washed twice in 50 mM ABC/50% acetonitrile (ACN) and dried in a Speed Vac. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT / 50 mM ABC solution for 45 minutes at 56°C. Gel pieces were dehydrated in ACN and alkylated in 55 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 minutes at room temperature, washed twice with 50% ACN and dehydrated with 100% ACN. Gel pieces were dried in Speed Vac and subjected to Trypsin-LysC digestion (3 ng/μl in 50mM ABC; 90% Trypsin 10% LysC) overnight at 37°C. Peptides containing supernatants were collected. Remaining peptides were washed out from gel pieces with 30% ACN / 3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) followed by washing with 100% ACN, and combined with post-digestion supernatants. Formic acid acidified peptide solutions (0.5% final) were purified on styrenedivinylbenzene reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RP) StageTip discs and subjected to mass spectrometry. Samples were analyzed and quantified as described below. Heatmaps were generated with Nova v0.5 software on the averaged abundance values for all detected CI subunits and assembly factors. The difference heatmap was generated based on the student’s t-test differences with a p-value in the significant range obtained from label-free quantification of mitochondrial complexome. CI from MEFs OE Plasmids containing genes encoding the murine wild type and proteolytically inactive CLPP (ClppS149A) fused to the double FLAG tag were constructed and transiently overexpressed for 48 hours in CLPP deficient MEFs, as described previously (Szczepanowska et al, 2016). Mitochondria were isolated, lysed in DDM, and subjected to BN-PAGE as described above. Bands corresponding to the fully assembled Complex I defined with the help of the in gel CI activity were cut out from the BN-PAGE and prepared for a MS analysis as described for the Low-Resolution Complexome Profiling. pSILAC with L-AHA-mediated enrichment Triplicates of equal numbers of CLPP +/+ and -/- MEF cells were cultured in complete, high glucose DMEM medium to 70% confluency. Cells were washed with PBS and switched to depletion medium for 30 minutes [DMEM without methionine, arginine, and lysine, supplemented with: glucose (4.5 g/l), sodium pyruvate (100 μg/ml), glutamine (4 mM), dialyzed FBS (10%), penicillin/streptomycin]. Depletion medium was replaced by “intermediate” (CLPP+/+: 84 μg/ml [13C6] L-arginine and 146 μg/ml [4,4,5,5-D4] L-lysine (Silantes)), or “heavy” (CLPP -/-: 84 μg/ml [13C6, 15N4] ] L-arginine and 146 μg/ml [13C6,15N2] L-lysine (Silantes)) labeling medium [DMEM supplemented with: 0.1 mM L-azidohomoalanine (AHA), glucose (4.5 g/l), sodium pyruvate (100 μg/ml), glutamine (4 mM), dialyzed FBS (10%), penicillin/streptomycin], and cells were metabolic labeled for 30 minutes. Oppositely SILAC-labeled cells were combined and washed twice with PBS. Cells were lysed in 8M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) using the Bioruptor instrument, and L-AHA-labeled newly synthesized proteins were enriched using the Click-iT® protein Enrichment Kit (Thermo) accordingly to manufacturer instructions. Resin-bound proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT (in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 1 % SDS, 250 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA) for 15 min at 70°C, followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in dark. Resin-bound proteins were stringently washed with SDS buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 250 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA), Urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8), 20% isopropanol, and 20% ACN. Trypsin digestion of proteins bound to the resin was performed overnight at 37°C in a buffer containing 2.5 μg/ml trypsin, 100 mM TrisHCl pH 8, 2 mM CaCl2, 10% ACN. Peptides were washed out from the resin, diluted to the final ACN concentration of 2%, acidified with formic acid (0.5% final), purified on SDB-RP StageTip discs and subjected to mass spectrometry. MS Analysis All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent) and separated with 60 min or 150 min gradients (Table 1). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode and MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation using a collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20.0 s

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis for Low-Resolution Complexome Profiling, Determination of the CLPXP content in the CI-containing fractions, and pSILAC metabolic labeling combined with L-AHA-mediated enrichment for newly synthesized peptides All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot MOUSE.fasta (downloaded at: 16.6.2017) database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. However, for the searches for oxidation products up to three variable modifications were used in multiple searches (Table 2). In Searches for cysteine oxidation products carbamidomethylation was treated as variable modification. The match between runs option was enabled. When SILAC labeling quantification was used, and the re-quantify option was enabled.     Tables for Supplementary Information Table 1. Lc Gradients Gradiend 1 T Flowrate  [nl/min] B [%]   0 250 5   3 250 7   43 250 27   47 250 50   51 250 90   60 250 90         Gradient 2 T Flowrate  [nl/min] B [%]   0 250 3   1 250 4   120 250 27   139 250 50   140 250 90   150 250 90     Table 2 Oxidation products Name (Madian & Regnier, JPR 2010) MQ  name UniMod ID used Site position Comp mas shift search  Remarks Arginine oxidation to glutamic semialdehyde Arg->GluSA #344 R anywhere H(-5) C(-1) N(-3) O -43.05343 1   Lysine oxidation to aminoadipic semialdehyde Lys->Allysine #352 K anywhere H(-3) N(-1) O  -1.03163 1   Proline oxidation to 2-pyrrolidinone Pro->Pyrrolidone  #360 P anywhere H(-2) C(-1) O(-1)  -30.01057 2   Proline oxidation to glutamic semialdehyde Pro->GluSA #35 P anywhere O 15.99492 2   Threonine oxidation to 2-amino-3-ketobutyric acid (= 2-amino-3-oxo-butanoic acid) Thr->AKBA #401 T  anywhere H(-2) -2.01565 2   Oxidation of glutamate to Pyruvyl (->peptide cleavage) Glu->Pyruvyl No E N-terminal H(-5) C(-3) N(-1) O (-2)  -87.03203 3 Peptide cleavage, requires semitryptic (N) search Oxidation of aspartate to Pyruvyl (->peptide cleavage) Asp->Pyruvyl No D N-terminal H(-3) C(-2) N(-1) O (-2)  -73.01638 3 Peptide cleavage, requires semitryptic (N) search Amadori product - Glycation Hex (K) #41 K anywhere H(10) O(5) C(6) 162.05282 4   AGE´s Carboxymethyllysine (CML) CML No K anywhere H(2) C(2) O(2) 58.00548 4   Cysteine oxidation to cystein sulfinic acid  Oxidation #35 C anywhere O 15.99492 5   Cystein oxydation to cystein sulfenic acid  Dioxidation #425 C anywhere O(2) 31.98983 5   Cysteine oxidation to oxidation of cysteine to cysteic acid Trioxidation #345 C anywhere O(3) 47.98474 5

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of the turnover of complex I (CI), the largest mitochondrial respiratory chain complex, remains enigmatic despite huge advancement in understanding its structure and the assembly. Here, we report that the NADH-oxidizing N-module of CI is turned over at a higher rate and largely independently of the rest of the complex by mitochondrial matrix protease ClpXP, which selectively removes and degrades damaged subunits. The observed mechanism seems to be a safeguard against the accumulation of dysfunctional CI arising from the inactivation of the N-module subunits due to attrition caused by its constant activity under physiological conditions. This CI salvage pathway maintains highly functional CI through a favorable mechanism that demands much lower energetic cost than de novo synthesis and reassembly of the entire CI. Our results also identify ClpXP activity as an unforeseen target for therapeutic interventions in the large group of mitochondrial diseases characterized by the CI instability.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial respiratory complex i; proteolytic control; salvage pathway; respiratory deficiency; clpxp protease;

### Affiliations
Institute for Mitochondrial Diseases and Aging, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, D-50931 Cologne, Germany,
Institute of Mitochondrial Disease and Ageing, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne 



### Submitter
Karolina Szczepanowska

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Trifunovic
Institute for Mitochondrial Diseases and Aging, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, D-50931 Cologne, Germany,


