### Accession
PXD009870

### Title
Proteomics of JHS samples identifies proteins associated with heart failure

### Description
RELEVANCE: Identifying early plasma protein biomarkers that predict the development of heart failure (HF) following myocardial infarction (MI) will help to stratify at risk subjects and provide insight into more effective therapeutic strategies. OBJECTIVE/HYPOTHESIS: The goal of this study was to determine markers of HF in African Americans, using plasma samples collected before the development of symptoms. We propose that early plasma glycoprotein changes will link to later development of heart failure.  ApolipoproteinF will be the strongest indicator. METHODS: Plasma samples from a subset of Jackson Heart Study participants with a history of MI but without prevalent heart failure (HF) at visit 2 (2005-2008) were analyzed by glycoproteomics. Individuals were grouped into those who experienced subsequent HF hospitalization after visit 2 (n=15; 3 men/ 12 women) and those without HF hospitalization through 2012 (n=45; 24 men/ 21 women). N-linked plasma glycopeptides were quantified by solid-phase extraction coupled to mass spectrometry and identified using RefSeq and SwissProt. Proteins were mapped for biological processes and functional pathways using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) and linked to clinical characteristics.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma glycopeptides were isolated using a label-free method and identified as described previously.[9-12] Plasma proteins were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin-digested into peptides for glycoproteomic analysis.[10-12] The trypsinized peptide mixture was oxidized and conjugated to a solid support using hydrazide chemistry, and glycopeptides that were N-linked to the column were released using PNGase F treatment. The released peptides were cleaned using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) coupled with a 15 cm × 75 μm C18 column (5 μm particles with 100 Å pore size). Target values in MS were 1e6 ions at a resolution setting of 70,000 and in MS2 1e5 ions at a resolution setting of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4; Thermo Fisher) against the human RefSeq database (November 3, 2013 version) containing 53,918 sequences. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 to eliminate low-probability protein identifications. Peptides were quantified using spectral counting and total spectral counts of each sample were used for normalization. Missing values were replaced with a small value (0.01) in order to calculate the ratio and p-value. Samples were run in duplicate and results combined for analysis. A total of 88 proteins were identified, of which 41% (36 proteins) were found in both runs.

### Publication Abstract
We hypothesized that identifying plasma glycoproteins that predict the development of heart failure following myocardial infarction (MI) could help to stratify subjects at risk. Plasma collected at visit 2 (2005-2008) from an MI subset of Jackson Heart Study participants underwent glycoproteomics and was grouped by the outcome: (1) heart failure hospitalization after visit 2 (<i>n</i> = 15) and (2) without hospitalization by 2012 (<i>n</i> = 45). Proteins were mapped for biological processes and functional pathways using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and linked to clinical characteristics. A total of 198 glycopeptides corresponding to 88 proteins were identified (data available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009870). Of these, 14 glycopeptides were significantly different between MI and MI + HF groups and corresponded to apolipoprotein (Apo) F, transthyretin, Apo C-IV, prostaglandin-D2 synthase, complement C9, and CD59 (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05 for all). All proteins were elevated in the MI + HF group, except CD59, which was lower. Four canonical pathways were upregulated in the MI + HF group (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05 for all): acute phase response, liver X receptor/retinoid X receptor, and macrophage reactive oxygen species generation. The coagulation pathway was significantly downregulated in the MI + HF group (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Even after adjustment for age and sex, Apo F was associated with the increased risk for heart failure (OR = 21.84; 95% CI 3.20-149.14). In conclusion, glycoproteomic profiling provided candidate early MI predictors of later progression to heart failure.

### Keywords
Myocardial infarction, Heart failure, Jackson heat study, Proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Mississippi Medical Center
University of Mississippi Medical Center Director, Mississippi Center for Heart Research Professor, Department of Physiology and Biophysics Research Health Scientist, Research Service G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Veterans Affairs Medical Center

### Submitter
Elizabeth Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Merry L Lindsey, Ph.D.
University of Mississippi Medical Center Director, Mississippi Center for Heart Research Professor, Department of Physiology and Biophysics Research Health Scientist, Research Service G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Veterans Affairs Medical Center


