### Accession
PXD011220

### Title
Pichia pastoris organelles by LC-ESI-MS

### Description
Organelles from Pichia, either grown on glucose or methanol were purified and analysed using LC-ESI-MS. Two biological replicates each had been analyzed leading to four replicate data sets for every organelle. Organelles analyzed: cis golgi, trans golgi, plasma membrane, microsomes, cytosol, vacuole, peroxisomes and mitochondria

### Sample Protocol
P. pastoris cells were cultivated on glucose or methanol until they reached the late logarithmic growth phase. Cellular fractions enriched of highly pure organelles were isolated following procedures which had previously been described for P. pastoris . Isolated organelles from methanol and glucose grown cells and the respective homogenates were evaluated for specific marker protein enrichment by Western blots and subjected to proteomics identification.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed with a nano LC-ESI-MS system. A standard 180 min gradient using 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile as solvents was applied. Data interpretation was done  using DataAnalysis 4.0 (XML file conversion) and for protein identification the files were converted to XML files, which are suitable for performing a MS/MS ion search with ProteinScape (Bruker software, MASCOT embedded). A MASCOT score of 30 were minimum thresholds for a positive hit. Alternatively a quantitative stragety using TMT labeling was applied. 12 fractions (high pH RP) were collected and injected to a nano LC-ESI-MS system. A standard 120 min gradient using 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile as solvents was applied.

### Publication Abstract
The compartmentalization of metabolic and regulatory pathways is a common pattern of living organisms. Eukaryotic cells are subdivided into several organelles enclosed by lipid membranes. Organelle proteomes define their functions. Yeasts, as simple eukaryotic single cell organisms, are valuable models for higher eukaryotes and frequently used for biotechnological applications. While the subcellular distribution of proteins is well studied in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, this is not the case for other yeasts like Komagataella phaffii (syn. Pichia pastoris). Different to most well-studied yeasts, K. phaffii can grow on methanol, which provides specific features for production of heterologous proteins and as a model for peroxisome biology. We isolated microsomes, very early Golgi, early Golgi, plasma membrane, vacuole, cytosol, peroxisomes and mitochondria of K. phaffii from glucose- and methanol-grown cultures, quantified their proteomes by liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry of either unlabeled or tandem mass tag-labeled samples. Classification of the proteins by their relative enrichment, allowed the separation of enriched proteins from potential contaminants in all cellular compartments except the peroxisomes. We discuss differences to S. cerevisiae, outline organelle specific findings and the major metabolic pathways and provide an interactive map of the subcellular localization of proteins in K. phaffii.

### Keywords
Organelle preparation, Pichia pastoris

### Affiliations
BOKU - Vienna
University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Clemens Grünwald-Gruber

### Lab Head
Dr Friedrich Altmann
University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna Department of Chemistry


