### Accession
PXD007235

### Title
Extensive and systematic rewiring of histone post-translational modifications in cancer model systems

### Description
Histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) generate a complex combinatorial code that regulate gene expression and nuclear functions, and whose deregulation has been documented in different types of cancers. Therefore, the availability of relevant culture models that can be manipulated and that retain the epigenetic features of the tissue of origin is absolutely crucial for studying epigenetic mechanisms underlying cancer, as well as for testing epigenetic drugs and uncovering possible epigenetic biomarkers. In this study, we took advantage of quantitative mass spectrometry to comprehensively profile histone PTMss in patient tumor tissues, primary cultures and cell lines from two representative tumor models, breast cancer and glioblastoma, revealing a dramatic and systematic rewiring of histone marks in cell culture conditions, which include a decrease of H3K27me3, H3K79me1/me2 and H3K9ac/K14ac, and an increase of H3K36me1/me2. While some changes occurr in short-term primary cultures, most of them are instead time-dependent and appear only in long-term cultures. Remarkably, such change mostly revert in cell line- and primary cell-derived in vivo xenograft models. Our results support the use of short-term cultures and xenografts models as the most representative models of in vivo epigenetic processes, and suggest cautions when using cell lines and long-term primary cultures for epigenetic investigations.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of histone PTMs. About 4 μg of histones per run per sample were mixed with an approximately equal amount of super-SILAC mix and separated on a 17% SDS-PAGE gel. Bands corresponding to histones H3 and H4 were excised, chemically alkylated with D6-acetic anhydride, in-gel digested with trypsin (the combination of chemical alkylation and trypsin digestion generates an “Arg-C-like” digestion) and desalted on handmade nanocolumns (StageTips) as previously described (22). Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an in-house-made 25-cm column (inner diameter 75 μm, outer diameter 350 μm outer diameter, 1.9 μm ReproSil, Pur C18AQ medium), using a ultra nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (EASY-nLC™ 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientic), or an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientic), 50-cm long (inner diameter 75 µm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles), which were connected online to a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a Nanospray Flex™ or an EASY-Spray™ Ion Sources (Thermo Fisher Scientific), respectively. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN plus 0.1% FA. Peptides were injected in an aqueous 1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and were separated with a 100-min linear gradient of 0–40% solvent B, followed by a 5-min gradient of 40–60% and a 5-min gradient of 60–95% at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The Q Exactive HF instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1650) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 35,000 at m/z 400. The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value for MS1 of 3×106 and fragmented by HCD with a normalized collision energy setting of 25%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 msec for full scans and 50 msec for MS/MS and the target value for MS/MS was set to 1×106. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 sec and the standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were as follows: spray voltage of 2.4 kV, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow. Global proteome analysis. Samples were in-gel trypsin digested. The MS analysis was performed on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientic) connected online to a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a an EASY-Spray™ Ion Sources (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were analyzed in technical triplicates using a top-15 method similar to that used for histones, but with a linear 70 min gradient from 5 to 30% of solvent B, a MS1 resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 and an accumulation time of 80 msec for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Histone PTM Data analysis. Acquired RAW data were analyzed using the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.5.2.8, which performed peak list generation and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. The Uniprot HUMAN_histones 1502 database was used for peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to Arg-C. The estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set at a maximum of 1%. The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor and fragment ions. Two missed cleavages were allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Variable modifications include lysine D3-acetylation (+45.0294 Da), lysine monomethylation (+ 59.0454, corresponding to the sum of D3-acetylation (+45.0294) and monomethylation (+14.016 Da)), dimethylation (+28.031 Da), trimethylation (+42.046 Da), and lysine acetylation (+42.010 Da). To reduce the search time and the rate of false positives, which increase with increasing the number of variable modifications included in the database search (25), the raw data were analyzed through multiple parallel MaxQuant jobs (26), setting different combinations of variable modifications: (1) D3-acetylation, lysine monomethylation with D3-acetylation, dimethylation and lysine acetylation, (2) D3-acetylation, lysine monomethylation with D3-acetylation, dimethylation and trimethylation, (3) D3-acetylation, lysine monomethylation with D3-acetylation, trimethylation and lysine acetylation. Peptides with Andromeda score less than 60 (corresponding to a Mascot score of 15 (27), which has been previously used as a cut-off value (28)) and localization probability score less than 0.75, were removed. Identifications and retention times were used to guide the manual quantification of each modified peptide using QualBrowser version 2.0.7 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Site assignment was evaluated using QualBrowser and MaxQuant Viewer 1.3.0.5. Extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) were constructed for each doubly charged precursor based on its m/z value, using a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a mass precision up to four decimals. For each histone modified peptide, the relative abundance (RA) was estimated by dividing the area under the curve (AUC) of each modified peptide for the sum of the areas corresponding to all the observed forms of that peptide (29). For SILAC experiments, Arg10 was selected as heavy label (multiplicity = 2) in MaxQuant. The heavy form of each modified peptide was quantified from its XIC and the relative abundance quantified. L/H ratios of relative abundances were visualized and clusterized using Perseus, with correlation distance and complete linkage as parameters (30). The principal component analysis (PCA) was also performed using Perseus. Global proteome analysis. The MS data were processed with MaxQuant, using the Uniprot HUMAN 1410 database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and two missed cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were included as variable modifications and the FDR was set to 1%, both at the protein and peptide level. The label-free software MaxLFQ [32] was activated, as well as the “match between runs” feature (match from and to, matching time window=2 min).

### Publication Abstract
Histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) generate a complex combinatorial code that regulates gene expression and nuclear functions, and whose deregulation has been documented in different types of cancers. Therefore, the availability of relevant culture models that can be manipulated and that retain the epigenetic features of the tissue of origin is absolutely crucial for studying the epigenetic mechanisms underlying cancer and testing epigenetic drugs. In this study, we took advantage of quantitative mass spectrometry to comprehensively profile histone PTMs in patient tumor tissues, primary cultures and cell lines from three representative tumor models, breast cancer, glioblastoma and ovarian cancer, revealing an extensive and systematic rewiring of histone marks in cell culture conditions, which includes a decrease of H3K27me2/me3, H3K79me1/me2 and H3K9ac/K14ac, and an increase of H3K36me1/me2. While some changes occur in short-term primary cultures, most of them are instead time-dependent and appear only in long-term cultures. Remarkably, such changes mostly revert in cell line- and primary cell-derived in vivo xenograft models. Taken together, these results support the use of xenografts as the most representative models of in vivo epigenetic processes, suggesting caution when using cultured cells, in particular cell lines and long-term primary cultures, for epigenetic investigations.

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Primary cells, Tissue, Cell culture

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana, Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology


